arXiv:2004.14115v2 [math.QA] 27 May 2020  SPECTRAL TRUNCATIONS IN NONCOMMUTATIVE
                                                   GEOMETRY AND OPERATOR SYSTEMS

                                                         ALAIN CONNES AND WALTER D. VAN SUIJLEKOM

                                           Abstract. In this paper we extend the traditional framework of noncommu-
                                           tative geometry in order to deal with spectral truncations of geometric spaces
                                           (i.e. imposing an ultraviolet cutoff in momentum space) and with tolerance
                                           relations which provide a coarse grain approximation of geometric spaces at
                                           a finite resolution. In our new approach the traditional role played by C-
                                           algebras is taken over by operator systems. As part of the techniques we treat
                                           C-envelopes, dual operator systems and stable equivalence. We define a prop-
                                           agation number for operator systems, which we show to be an invariant under
                                           stable equivalence and use to compare approximations of the same space.

                                               We illustrate our methods for concrete examples obtained by spectral trun-
                                           cations of the circle. These are operator systems of finite-dimensional Toeplitz
                                           matrices and their dual operator systems which are given by functions in the
                                           group algebra on the integers with support in a fixed interval. It turns out
                                           that the cones of positive elements and the pure state spaces for these oper-
                                           ator systems possess a very rich structure which we analyze including for the
                                           algebraic geometry of the boundary of the positive cone and the metric aspect
                                           i.e. the distance on the state space associated to the Dirac operator. The
                                           main property of the spectral truncation is that it keeps the isometry group
                                           intact. In contrast, if one considers the other finite approximation provided by
                                           circulant matrices the isometry group becomes discrete, even though in this
                                           case the operator system is a C-algebra. We analyze this in the context of
                                           the finite Fourier transform on the cyclic group.

                                               The extension of noncommutative geometry to operator systems allows one
                                           to deal with metric spaces up to finite resolution by considering the relation
                                           d(x, y) <  between two points, or more generally a tolerance relation which
                                           naturally gives rise to an operator system.

                                                                          Contents

                                          1. Introduction                                                                    2

                                          2. Preliminaries on operator systems                                               5

                                          2.1. Operator spaces and operator systems                                          5

                                          2.2. Non-unital operator systems                                                   8

                                          2.3. Duals of operator systems                                                     10

                                          2.4. C-envelopes of operator systems                                               11

                                          2.5. Silov boundary ideals                                                         13

                                          2.6. Stable equivalence for operator systems                                       15

                                          2.7. Propagation number as an invariant of operator systems                        17

                                          3. Spectral truncations                                                            18

                                          3.1. Spectral truncation of the circle                                             19

                                          3.2. State space of the truncated circle (n = 3)                                   20

                                          Date: May 28, 2020.
                                                                                                                 1
2              ALAIN CONNES AND WALTER D. VAN SUIJLEKOM

   4. Toeplitz operator systems: general structure        28

   4.1. Toeplitz matrices                                 28

   4.2. The Fej´er­Riesz operator system                  29

   4.3. Duality with the Toeplitz operator system         30

   4.4. Pure states of the Toeplitz operator system       31

   4.5. The cone of positive Toeplitz matrices            32

   4.6. Distance on spectral truncations of the circle    35

   5. Toeplitz and circulant matrices                     39

   5.1. Fourier transform on the cyclic group of order m  39

   5.2. Relation between circulant and Toeplitz matrices  41

   6. Outlook                                             43

   References                                             44

                                          1. Introduction

   Noncommutative geometry [19] has shown that it is possible to give a fully
spectral description of Riemannian spin manifolds. In fact, the mere knowledge
of the spectrum of the Dirac operator D relative to that of a function algebra A
allows one to reconstruct the full Riemannian spin manifold M [20]. In physical
terms this can be phrased by saying that we can probe the structure of curved
spacetime around us by means of eigenfrequencies and eigenfunctions for a fermion
that moves through that spacetime.

   For the mathematical reconstruction of M it is crucial to know the full spectrum
of D and A. In practice, however, it is clear that we will only have access to part of
that spectrum. Indeed, we are limited by the power and resolution of our detectors
and typically study physical phenomena up to a certain energy scale. Motivated
by this we pose the following question:

          can the framework of noncommutative geometry be extended to the
          case where only part of the spectrum of D is available together with,
          say, a certain truncation of the algebra A?

This question has been present all along in the development of the relation between
noncommutative geometry and physics with the long term goal of finding testable
models of quantum gravity from truncated versions of the model given by quanta
of geometry in [16, 17]. It has been clear from the start that spectral truncation,
which means introducing a cutoff in momentum space truncating the Hilbert space
of fermions, respects all continuous symmetries and is superior to an artificial dis-
cretization. The spectral truncation in relation with the metric aspect has been
studied and formalized in the work [23] and the present paper is directly in line
with this development. Our new input is to put forward the role of operator sys-
tems in the general theory and to analyze in great details, including the algebraic
geometry of the boundary of the positive cone, the example of the truncated circle
with its wealth of structure coming from the theory of Toeplitz matrices.

   The way operator systems naturally arise in the process of spectral truncation is
as follows. Since the self-adjoint Dirac operator D acts in a Hilbert space H, a natu-
ral spectral truncation is given simply by a spectral projection P onto eigenspaces of
D; this is an operator that commutes with D. The natural truncation of the action
of the -algebra A to the Hilbert space P H is given by the space P AP . Since P does
SPECTRAL TRUNCATIONS IN NCG AND OPERATOR SYSTEMS  3

not commute with A, this is not an algebra anymore. Moreover in many interesting
examples if one takes the C-algebra generated by P AP one gets a non-informative
full matrix algebra. However, not all is lost: the space P AP is a -closed subspace
in B(H), i.e. it is a so-called operator system [18] (cf. [27, 40, 42, 8]). Such spaces
have an extremely rich structure: they are matrix ordered, they possess cones of
positive elements, (pure) state spaces, et cetera. Moreover, for truncations it turns
out that symmetries of the pair (A, D) induce symmetries of (P AP, P DP ). This
follows quite easily from the fact that P is a spectral projection of D.

   Another viewpoint is obtained when we change our perspective from momentum
to position space. The energy cutoff translates to a consideration of metric spaces
with a certain finite resolution , where we say that two points x, y are equivalent
if d(x, y) < . This is not an equivalence relation, but it is a so-called tolerance
relation. We may imitate the construction of the C-algebra of a foliation or more
generally of a groupoid C-algebra with the crucial difference that the convolu-
tion product cannot be defined due to the lack of transitivity. However, given
the symmetry and reflexivity, a tolerance relation does define an operator system.
This creates a generalization of the basic construction of noncommutative geome-
try which started from analysing the geometric examples of intractable spaces of
leaves of foliations using noncommutative algebras. Here the issue of the lack of
transitivity of the relation is already present in the simplest case where the gen-
erated equivalence relation has a single class i.e. corresponds to the C-algebra of
compact operators. Besides the class of examples of operator systems associated to
spectral truncations a whole new class thus appears from tolerance relations. Such
relations appear naturally in the homotopy theory of simplicial complexes which
do not fulfill the Kan-extension property as was shown in [21, 22].

   In this paper we develop the formalism needed for doing noncommutative geom-
etry with operator systems. We will focus mainly on the `topological properties'
described by the operator systems and corresponding state spaces. The metric as-
pect as provided by spectral triples extends in a straightforward manner to the new
framework and in §4.6 we analyse the distance function on the truncated circle. For
some preliminary results on the metric aspect, we refer to [23, 7]. Computer sim-
ulations involving a spectral truncation adopting also the Heisenberg quantization
relation of [16, 17] have been reported in [32, 31].

   The key concepts that we will discuss and introduce here are:

        · operator systems: both concrete and abstract (in the sense of [18]);
        · duality between operator systems (in the sense of [4, 18]);
        · enveloping C-algebras of operator systems (in the sense of [35]);
        · stable equivalence of operator systems;
        · propagation number as a new invariant under stable equivalence;
        · extreme rays in the cone of positive elements of an operator system;
        · pure state spaces of operator systems.

   We will give many examples of the theory, based on spectral truncations of the
circle and spaces at finite resolution. This allows to test the above concepts for
some concrete operator systems. We will consider:

        · the Toeplitz operator system C(S1)(n) arising from spectral truncations of
          the circle;

        · elements in the group algebra of Z of finite support: C(Z)(n);
4  ALAIN CONNES AND WALTER D. VAN SUIJLEKOM

        · the circulant matrices, or, equivalently the group algebra C(Cm) of the
          cyclic group of order m;

        · operator systems E(R) associated to tolerance relations R; in particular
          describing metric spaces with finite resolution.

   The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we review and develop some con-
cepts and techniques for operator spaces and operator systems, including the ap-
propriate maps between them. This also includes a discussion on the C-envelope,
first introduced by Arveson [4] but realized by Hamana in [35]. We introduce a
so-called propagation number which measures how far an operator system is from
the C-envelope. We show that this is an invariant under stable equivalence of
operator systems.

   In Section 3 we come to our main motivation: spectral truncations. For the
circle we present a fully detailed analysis of the structure of the state space for
the smallest non-trivial truncation (of rank 3) but which already turns out to be
extremely rich.

   We continue our analysis in Section 4 where the underlying mathematical struc-
ture of Toeplitz operator systems is unveiled and analyzed in full detail. We identify
the C-envelope and compute the propagation number. The dual operator system
is realized in terms of functions in the group algebra of Z with support in a fixed
interval. Because of the close relation with old factorization results of positive
functions on the circle by Fej´er and Riesz we will call this system the Fej´er­Riesz
operator system. Using the duality we reach a full understanding of the pure state
spaces and extreme rays, both for the Toeplitz operator system, as well as for
the Fej´er­Riesz operator system. Moreover, the duality allows for a new proof
of another old result by Carath´eodory on Vandermonde factorizations of positive
Toeplitz matrices. One interesting feature which arises in the algebraic geometry
of the boundary hypersurface of the cone of positive Toeplitz matrices is the link
between the rank of the matrix and the singularity of the hypersurface (see The-
orem 4.15). In §4.6 we analyse the distance function on the truncated circle and
prove in Theorem 4.20 that it is larger than the Kantorovich distance of the cor-
responding probability measures on the circle. Other results in this direction have
been reported in [23, 32, 31] while further Gromov­Hausdorff convergence results
will be reported elsewhere by the second author.

   The relation between Toeplitz and circulant matrices is analyzed in Section 5. We
realize the finite Fourier transform in terms of a duality between operator systems.

   In the final Section 6 we explain how the framework proposed in this paper i.e.
using operator systems rather than C-algebras, allows one to apply the fundamen-
tal idea of noncommutative geometry of associating a noncommutative C-algebra
to a quotient space which is intractable by standard topological methods, to situa-
tions where the equivalence relation defining the quotient is no longer assumed to
be transitive. The detailed development of this idea will be done in a forthcoming
paper.

Acknowledgements. We are grateful to Gilles Pisier for his useful remarks on an
early version of this paper. We thank Fabien Besnard for very useful comments.
WvS would like to thank IHE´S for their hospitality and support during a visit in
February 2020. WvS thanks Bram Mesland for numerous fruitful discussions on
operator spaces. We thank Hugo Woerdeman for fruitful interaction.
SPECTRAL TRUNCATIONS IN NCG AND OPERATOR SYSTEMS  5

                         2. Preliminaries on operator systems

   In this section we review and develop some of the general concepts and techniques
on operator systems that are needed in the later sections.

2.1. Operator spaces and operator systems. We start by briefly recalling the
theory of operator spaces and operator systems, referring to [27, 40, 42, 8] for more
details.

2.1.1. Operator spaces. Operator space theory can be considered as a "quantum"
or noncommutative version of Banach space theory in the sense that one extends
the usual norms on a vector space E to so-called matrix-norms, i.e. norms on
Mn(E) for every n  N. Let us make this more precise (cf. [27, Section 2.1] for
more details).

Definition 2.1. Let E be a vector space. A matrix norm · on E is an assignment
of a norm · n on the matrix space Mn(E) for each n  N.

   An (abstract) operator space is a linear space E together with a matrix norm ·
for which

    (1) E is complete as a normed vector space.
    (2) x  y m+n = max{ x m, y n}
    (3) x n   x m 

for all x  Mm(E), y  Mn(E) and   Mnm(C),   Mmn(C).

   From the first condition it actually follows that all Mn(E) are complete with
respect to the norm · n (cf. [27, Section 2.1]).

   Given two operator spaces E and F and a linear mapping  : E  F , for each
n  N there is a corresponding linear map n : Mn(E)  Mn(F ) from matrices
with coefficients in E to matrices with coefficients in F , given by

                          n(x) = ((xij)) ; x = (xij)  Mn(E).

To each n we may associate its operator norm and the completely bounded norm
is defined to be

                                      cb := sup{ n : n  N}.

There are the following notions of morphisms between operator spaces and operator
systems.

Definition 2.2. Let  : E  F be a linear map between operator spaces.

    (1) We say that  is completely bounded (respectively, completely contractive)
          if  cb <  (respectively,  cb  1).

    (2) We say that  is completely isometric if each n is isometric.

   The prototypical example of an operator space is given by a closed subspace of
B(H) for some Hilbert space H. Indeed, there is a natural inclusion Mn(E) 
Mn(B(H)) = B(Hn) which determines a norm · n on Mn(E). We call such an
E a concrete operator space. It follows from Ruan's representation theorem [49]
(cf. [27, Section 2.3] that any abstract operator space is completely isometrically
isomorphic to a concrete operator space.
6  ALAIN CONNES AND WALTER D. VAN SUIJLEKOM

2.1.2. Operator systems. We now focus our attention on operator systems, with

the crucial property that they possess cones of positive elements. Again there is

a notion of abstract operator system and concrete operator system, in fact both

originating from the seminal work by Choi and Effros [18]. Let us briefly sketch

these notions, referring to the original [18] and e.g. [40, Chapter 13] for more

details.
   Let E be a vector space equipped with a conjugate linear involution x  x.

We call such a space a -vector space and we set Eh = {x  E : x = x}. For
(xij)  Mn(E) we set (xij) = (xji) so that Mn(E) is also a -vector space. In
order to talk about positive elements we need a notion of ordering.

Definition 2.3. We say that a -vector space is matrix ordered if

    (1) for each n we are given a cone of positive elements Mn(E)+ in Mn(E)h,
    (2) Mn(E)+  (-Mn(E)+) = {0} for all n,
    (3) for every m, n and A  Mmn(C) we have that AMn(E)+A  Mm(E)+.

   We will write x  0 and call x positive whenever x  Mn(E)+. A map from
Mn(E) to Mn(F ) is then called positive if it maps Mn(E)+ to Mn(F )+.

Definition 2.4. Let  : E  F be a linear map between matrix-ordered -vector
spaces.

    (1) We call  completely positive if each n is positive.
    (2) We call  a complete order isomorphism if  is invertible with both  and

          -1 completely positive.

   We also say that  : E  F is a complete order injection if it is a complete order
isomorphism onto its image.

   Finally, let us address the role that 1 plays in an operator system. Let E be an
ordered -vector space. We call e  Eh an order unit for E if for each x  Eh there
is a t > 0 such that -te  x  te. It is called an Archimedean order unit if -te  x
for all t > 0 implies that x  0.

Definition 2.5. An (abstract) operator system is given by a matrix-ordered -
vector space E with an order unit e such that for all n

          e 0 · · · 0

   In  =  0            ...                    ...  ...  
                       ...                    ...       

              ...                                       
          
                                                    
                                                   0

              0 ··· 0 e

is an Archimedean order unit for Mn(E).

   There is a relation between operator systems and operator spaces and, in fact,
a matrix order induces a matrix norm (cf. [40, Proposition 13.3]):

   x n = inf       t:                    tIn   x        0
                                         x    tIn

for any x  Mn(E). This relationship respects the morphisms between operator
systems and operator spaces, as the following result shows.

Proposition 2.6. Let  : E  F be a linear map between operator systems.
SPECTRAL TRUNCATIONS IN NCG AND OPERATOR SYSTEMS  7

    (1) If  is completely positive, then it is completely bounded with

                                         cb =  = (1) .
    (2) A unital map  is completely positive if and only it is completely contractive.
    (3) A unital map  is a complete order injection if and only if it is completely

          isometric.

Proof. The first two statements can be found in [27] as Lemma 5.1.1 and Lemma
5.1.2, respectively, the third follows then directly from the second (cf. [9, §1.3.3]).

   We may summarize this by saying that there is a functor from abstract operator
systems to abstract operator spaces. The obtained abstract operator spaces have
naturally a unit and involution, and as discussed below in the concrete case, this
additional structure is the only nuance between the two notions. In fact the role
of the unit in passing from operator spaces to operator systems was fully clarified
by the work of D. Blecher and M. Neal [10] who found the norm identities that
qualify an element of an operator space as a unit of an operator system with the
given underlying operator space.

Definition 2.7. We say that a subspace E  B(H) is a (concrete) operator system
if it is self-adjoint in the sense that E = E where E = {x : x  E} and contains
the identity 1 in B(H).

   The cone of positive elements in E is defined to be

                                          E+ := E  B(H)+,

and, more generally, we write for any n  N:
                                  Mn(E)+ := Mn(E)  B(Hn)+.

This turns a concrete operator system in an abstract operator system. In the other
direction, the celebrated Choi­Effros Theorem shows that any abstract operator
system is completely order isomorphic to a concrete operator system [18].

   We also note that a unital complete order isomorphism  : A  B between two
unital C-algebras is a -isomorphism (see [27, Corollary 5.2.3] for a proof).

   We also have the following result.

Proposition 2.8. Let  : E  F be a completely isometric, completely positive
isomorphism between unital operator systems. Then  is unital.

Proof. This follows since the unit of a unital operator system is characterized
uniquely as the largest element among positive elements of norm  1.

2.1.3. States on operator systems. One of the advantages of working with operator
systems is that there is a notion of states, defined as positive linear functionals of
norm 1. Since for linear functionals  : E  C we have  cb =  (cf. [27,
Corollary 2.2.3] or [40, Proposition 3.8]), Proposition 2.6 above implies that a state
on E can equivalently be defined to be a linear functional  : E  C such that

                                              = (1) = 1.

This is completely analogous to the case of C-algebras (see for instance [8, Propo-
sition II.6.2.5]) and, in fact, for states we automatically have complete positivity
([40, Proposition 3.8]).
8  ALAIN CONNES AND WALTER D. VAN SUIJLEKOM

   In any case, we may talk about the state space S(E) of the operator system E; it
is a convex space which is compact for the weak -topology, so that Choquet theory
applies [41]. The pure states are then given by the extreme points in S(E). We call
the weak -closure of the set of extreme points in S(E) the pure state space; it will
be denoted by P(E).

   We also record from [8, Section II.6.3] that if E  A with A a C-algebra, and
 is a state on E, then by the Hahn­Banach Theorem  extends to a functional 
on A of norm one. Since (1) = 1,  is a state on A. For pure states on E there is
the following well-known result (cf. [11, Proposition 2.3.24]):.

Fact 2.9. Let  : E  C be a pure state. The set V of extensions of  to states
on A is a compact convex subset of S(A) (in the weak--topology) and any extreme
point of this set is a pure state on A. In particular,  allows for an extension to a
pure state on A.

2.2. Non-unital operator systems. For non-unital operator systems we shall
use the results of Werner [52] together with the following correction needed since
it is wrongly stated in that paper that the state space Sn(E) of any operator space
equipped with a matrix order is compact. This fails even for C-algebras such as
the algebra of sequences tending to 0 at . However the problem is fixed using the
following fact:

Lemma 2.10. Let Sn(E) be the state space consisting of positive linear functionals
on Mn(E) of norm 1. The rescaled state space Sn(E) := { |   Sn,   [0, 1]}
is weakly compact. Any continuous functional homogeneous of degree 1 on Sn(E)
reaches its maximum on Sn(E)  Sn(E).

   Werner considers matrix-ordered operator spaces. These are defined to be opera-
tor spaces E with a matrix order as in Definition 2.3 with the additional properties
that

     (1) the cones Mn(E)+ are all closed, and,
     (2) the involution is an isometry on Mn(E).

He then constructs "partial unitizations" for arbitrary matrix-ordered operator
spaces after proving their uniqueness (op.cit. Lemma 4.3). His construction pro-
ceeds as follows:

Definition 2.11. Let E be a matrix-ordered operator space and define A = A+In
for every matrix A  Mn(C). On the space E  C we define

    (1) (x, A) = (x, A) for all (x, A)  Mn(E)  Mn(C),
    (2) for any (x, A)  Mn(E  C)h we set

                  (x, A)  0 iff A  0 and (A-1/2xA- 1/2)  -1

          for all  > 0 and   Sn(E).

We denote by E the space E  C equipped with this order structure.

   When E is the matrix-ordered operator space associated to a possibly non-unital
C-algebra B this construction agrees with the traditional adjunction of a unit
B  B (see op.cit. Corollary 4.17). As shown in op.cit. Lemmas 4.8 and 4.9, one
has
        SPECTRAL TRUNCATIONS IN NCG AND OPERATOR SYSTEMS                9

Proposition 2.12. (i) Let E be a matrix-ordered operator space. The space E
defined above is a (unital) operator system.
(ii) Let T : E  F be a completely contractive and completely positive map between
matrix-ordered operator spaces E, F . Then the natural unital extension T : E 
F is completely positive.

   For x  E one lets E0 (x) := sup{|(x)| :   S(E)}. The number E0 (x) is
the so-called numerical radius of x  E; it also makes sense more generally for

x  Mn(E). Moreover, it allows to introduce a norm on Mn(E) as follows ([52,
Lemma 3.1]).

Lemma 2.13. Let E0 be the numerical radius.
(i) The map E : x  E0   0x
                       x 0  defines a norm on Mn(E) and we have E(·)    ·.

(ii) The inclusion map iE : E  E is completely contractive and completely posi-

tive.

(iii) The inclusion iE is a complete isometry when considered as a map from (E, E)

to E .

   In fact, in [52, Lemma 4.5] it is shown that if the embedding E  E is com-
pletely positive, then it is completely contractive if and only if it is a complete
isometry between (E, E) and E . It is here that Lemma 2.10 should be used
to conclude (in line 7 of the proof of [52, Lemma 4.5]) that the supremum E0 is
actually attained by a   Sn(E).

Corollary 2.14. Let T : E  F be a completely isometric, complete order iso-
morphism. Then T : E  F is a (unital) complete order isomorphism.

In line with the result in [52] we will make the following definition.

Definition 2.15. A non-unital operator system is given by a matrix-ordered oper-
ator space for which the norm E(·) coincides with the norm · .

   For a non-unital operator system the inclusion iE : E  E is a complete
isometry, and E will be called a unitization of E.

   The main result of [52] is then an analogue of the Choi­Effros Theorem for non-
unital operator systems. Indeed, since E is an (abstract) unital operator system
it can be realized as a concrete operator system in B(H) for some Hilbert space H.
It then follows that if E(·) and · coincide on Mn(E), then we can also realize
E via the (completely isometric) inclusion map E  E as a (concrete) non-unital
operator system in B(H) (see [52, Corollary 4.11]).

   Note that in the definition of a matrix-ordered operator space there is no re-
quirement of non-triviality of the positive cone. In particular starting with an
operator space E (with isometric involution) one can consider the trivial matrix
order Mn(E)+ = {0} for all n. The norm E is then the same as the original
norm on E since positivity of functionals is automatic. But then the Choi­Effros
Theorem applied to the partial unitization E implies Ruan's result for operator
spaces.

   In all the examples of matrix-ordered operator spaces considered in this paper,
the following non-triviality condition holds: the cones Mn(E)+ span Mn(E), or
more precisely (and for all n)

(1)     Mn(E)+ - Mn(E)+ = {x  Mn(E) | x = x}.
10  ALAIN CONNES AND WALTER D. VAN SUIJLEKOM

To understand the meaning of this condition in terms of the partial unitization E
note the following

Fact 2.16. Let A be a unital C-algebra and  a pure state on A. Then, with the
notations Ker()+ := Ker()  A+ and Ker()sa := Ker()  Asa one has

        (xy) = (x)(y) , x, y  A  Ker()+ - Ker()+ = Ker()sa.

Proof.If  is a morphism  : A  C and x = x  A fulfills (x) = 0 then with
|x| = xx one has (|x|) = 0 and x = |x| - y where also y  Ker()+. Conversely
if the irreducible GNS representation (H, , ) is of dimension > 1 one finds a
self-adjoint element a  A such that (a) = 0 but (a)  . Then one
has (a) = 0 but a / Ker()+ - Ker()+ since elements b  Ker()+ all fulfill
(b) = 0 since (b1/2) 2 = (b) = 0  (b) = 0.

   Thus one can define in general a character of a unital operator system as a pure
state  such that Ker()+ - Ker()+ = Ker()sa. Then condition (1) on a matrix-
ordered operator space means that the canonical state on the partial unitization
E is a character.

2.3. Duals of operator systems. Already in [18] Choi and Effros analyzed the
notion of duality for operator systems, which we now briefly discuss here. See also
[29] for a more recent perspective. In general, duals of operator systems are only
matrix-order vector spaces, but in the finite-dimensional case also an Archimedean
order unit can be constructed. Since our main interest in this type of duality is for
finite-dimensional Toeplitz matrices (cf. Section 4.3 below) we will here restrict to
this case.

   So let E be a finite-dimensional (abstract) operator system E. We let Ed be the
dual vector space of E and let Mn(Ed) be paired component-wise with Mn(E):

                                 (x) = (ij )(xij ) = ij (xij )

                                                                                       ij

where  = (ij)  Mn(Ed) and x = (xij)  Mn(E). We define a matrix order on
Ed by

               Mn(Ed)+ =   Mn(Ed) : (x)  0 for all x  Mn(E)+ .

One quickly checks that this is a matrix-order, since for any A  Mmn(C) we have

                                     (AA)(x) = (Atx(At))

so that AA  Mn(Ed)+ if  is, because Mm(E)+ is closed under conjugation by
a scalar-valued matrix.

   Let us now consider the existence of an Archimedean order unit. The notion of
faithful state makes sense for any operator system: a state  is faithful if (x) > 0
for x > 0.

Proposition 2.17 (Choi­Effros). let E be a finite-dimensional (abstract) operator
system E. Let Ed be the dual vector space of E, equipped with the above matrix-
ordering. A state  on E defines an order unit on Ed if and only if it is faithful.
Then diag(, . . . , ) is an Archimedean order unit on Mn(Ed). Faithful states exist
and endow Ed with the structure of an operator system.
SPECTRAL TRUNCATIONS IN NCG AND OPERATOR SYSTEMS                       11

Proof. The result follows from the existence of a compact base K for E+. For
any x  K there exists   E+d with (x) > 0 thus, by compactness there exists
a faithful state  : E  C. It is an order unit for Ed since the compact set
(K)  (0, ) is bounded away from 0 while (K) is bounded for any   Ehd. It
is also Archimedean since if  + t  E+d for all t > 0 one, has for any x  E+,
that (x) + t(x)  0 for all t > 0 and thus (x)  0. The extension to Mn(Ed) is

straightforward.

Lemma 2.18. Let E be a finite-dimensional (abstract) operator system E. There
is a complete order isomorphism of operator systems (Ed)d = E.

Proof. This is a straightforward application of the bipolar theorem, stating in the
finite-dimensional case that ((Ed)d)+ = E+.

   Let us now consider maps between operator systems and their duals. Clearly, if
 : E  F there is the induced map d : F d  Ed given by

                           d(f )(x) = f ((x)); (f  F d, x  E).

Proposition 2.19. If E and F are operator systems. A linear map  : E  F is
completely positive if and only if d : F d  Ed is completely positive.

Proof. In view of Lemma 2.18 it is sufficient to prove one implication. So suppose
that  is completely positive, i.e. (n)  0 for all n  0. Then (n) : Mn(F d) 
Mn(Ed) satisfies

d(n)()(x) = (dn)(ij )(xij ) = d(fij )(xij ) = fij ((xij )) = ((n)(x))

ij  ij

for  = (ij)  Mn(F d), x = (xij)  Mn(E). Hence if   0 it follows that
d(n)()  0.

Corollary 2.20. Extreme rays in the cone E+ are in one-to-one correspondence
to the pure states of Ed and, vice versa, pure states of E are in one-to-one corre-
spondence to extreme rays in the cone (Ed)+.

2.4. C-envelopes of operator systems. In [4] Arveson introduced the notion
of a C-envelope of an operator system. Their existence and uniqueness was estab-
lished in full generality by Hamana in [35] based on the theory of injective envelopes
(see also [40, Ch. 15] and [9, Section 4.3]). More recently, in [2, 3] Arveson revisited
his original approach (using so-called boundary representations) to the problem of
C-envelopes, basing himself on the work of Dritschel and McCullough [26]. In
this context, we also mention the paper by Arveson's student and grand-student
[25]. We here briefly recall some of these notions and the main result. We allow for
non-unital operator systems.

Definition 2.21. Let E be an operator system. A C -extension  : E  A of
E is given by a completely isometric and completely positive map such that A =
C((E)) and  : E  A is a complete order isomorphism onto its range.

   The above definition contains the usual one of a C-extension in the case of
unital operator systems (i.e. a unital order isomorphism onto its range, cf. [35,
Definition 2.1] as we show now:
12  ALAIN CONNES AND WALTER D. VAN SUIJLEKOM

Lemma 2.22. Let E be a unital operator system. Then any C-extension of E is
a C -extension.

Proof. The proof is based on the fact that states on unital operator systems, in
the sense of positive linear functionals of norm 1, are automatically unital. Thus
given a C-extension  : E  A states on E are restrictions of states on A and one
obtains that  : E  A is a complete order isomorphism onto its range.

   In fact in the special case of unital operator systems the notion of C -extension
is more general than the usual notion, as shown by the following:

Example 2.23. Let E be the smallest unital operator system consisting of scalar
multiples of the unit 1E. Let A := C0([0, )) be the C-algebra of continuous
functions vanishing at  on [0, ). Let  : E  A be given by (1E) = h with
h(x) := exp(-x). By construction  is a completely isometric and completely
positive map and its range generates A as a C-algebra. Moreover the map  :
E  A is a complete order isomorphism onto its range since evaluation at 0 
[0, ) gives a completely positive retraction  : A  E of the map .

   Let  : E  F be a completely isometric, complete order isomorphism of oper-
ator systems. We will say that two C -extensions  : E  A and  : F  B are
equivalent if there is a -isomorphism  : A  B such that    =   .

Definition 2.24. Let E be an operator system. A C -envelope is a C -extension
 : E  A with the following universal property: for every C -extension (B, )
there exists a unique surjective -homomorphism  : B  A such that    = .

   Existence of the C-envelope for unital operator systems was shown by Hamana
in [35] and we refer to that paper and [40, Ch. 15] and [9, Section 4.3] for the proof.
We now deal with the non-unital case.

Theorem 2.25. (i) The C -envelope of a non necessarily unital operator system
E exists and is unique (up to equivalence).
(ii) If the system is unital the C -envelope is equal to the C-envelope.

Proof. (i) Let us show existence of a C -envelope in the case that E  B(H) is
non-unital. Let E = E  C be the unitization of E as defined in Definition 2.11;
it is a unital operator system and so it has a C-envelope; let us denote this by
 : E  B. We claim that A = C((E))  B is a C -envelope of E. First by
Corollary 4.17 of [52] the unitization C((E)) is the usual C-algebra unitization.
The map iE : E  E is completely isometric and completely positive and so is
 =   iE : E  A. To show that  is a C -extension one needs to prove that
 : E  A is a complete order isomorphism on its range. Since B is a unital
C-algebra and A  B a C-subalgebra one has a canonical morphism  : A  B.
It extends the inclusion by sending the adjoined unit of A to 1B. Moreover

                                                =

If an element x   (E ), is positive in A then (x)  B is positive and since
 : E  B is an order isomorphism on its range there exists uniquely a positive
element y  E with (y) = (x). Let z  E with  (z) = x, one has

                                 (z) =    (z) = (x) = (y)

and hence z = y since  is an injection, so that z is positive. The same argument
applies to matrices and shows that  is a C -extension. Now suppose that  :
SPECTRAL TRUNCATIONS IN NCG AND OPERATOR SYSTEMS  13

E  C is some other C -extension. Then C is the C-algebra unitization of
C and  : E  C is a (unital) C-extension by Definition 2.21. Hence there
exists a surjective -homomorphism  : C  B, with B as defined above, such
that    = . The -homomorphism given by the restriction |C : C  B
lands in A = C((E)) since C = C((E)) by Definition 2.21. Thus we find that
 = |C : C  A is a surjection, and that    =   iE =  as desired.

   For uniqueness, assume that  : E  A and  : E  B are two C -envelopes of
E. The universal property of both give two surjective -homomorphisms  : A  B
and  : B  A such that    =  and    = . As a consequence      = ,
that is to say,    is the identity when restricted to (E)  A. But since  and
 are -homomorphisms and A is generated by (E) it follows that    = idA.
Similarly, we find    = idB so that A = B, compatibly with the extension maps
 and .
(ii) Let E be a unital operator system, and iE : E  Cenv(E) its C-envelope. Let
 : E  A be the C -envelope of E. Then by Lemma 2.22, iE is a C -extension.
Thus by the universal property of the C -envelope, there exists a unique surjective
-homomorphism  : Cenv(E)  A such that   iE = . Since the C-algebra
Cenv(E) is unital it follows that A is unital, with unit 1A equal to (1). Let 1E be
the unit of the operator system E. It follows that

                                 (1E) =   iE(1E) = (1) = 1A.

This shows that  : E  A is a C-envelope. Thus by the universal property of
C-envelopes there exists uniquely a surjective -homomorphism  : A  Cenv(E)
such that    = iE. One then concludes that  is the inverse of  since both
Cenv(E) and A are generated by the image of the operator system E.

Corollary 2.26. Let E be a unital operator system. Then Cenv(E) is the C-
algebra generated by E in Cenv(E ).

Proof. By construction the C-algebra generated by E in Cenv(E ) is the C -
envelope of E and by (ii) of Theorem 2.25 it coincides with the C-envelope:
iE : E  Cenv(E).

Remark 2.27. It is important in definition 2.21 to assume that the associated map
 is an order isomorphism with its range. The following example shows that if one
drops this hypothesis the C -envelope no longer exists. Consider the non-unital
system S formed of a single self-adjoint H with H = 1, and where the positive
cone is {0}. Then if one weakens definition 2.21 by dropping the requirement on
 , a C-extension  : E  A is simply a self-adjoint generating element h  A of
norm h = 1. In particular one can have h > 0 and one sees that this rules out
the existence of a C-envelope since h does not contain -1 in its spectrum. But the
system S does have a C-envelope which is the C-algebra C({±1}) and where H
is the function H(±1) := ±1.

   Part (ii) of Theorem 2.25 shows that we can drop the distinction between C-
envelope and C -envelope. In the following, we will use the terminology C-envelope
of E and denote it as iE : E  Cenv(E).

2.5. Silov boundary ideals. There is a useful description of the C-envelope in
terms of Silov boundary ideals that we now recall [4, 35]. We shall only use it in
the unital case and restrict to this case in this subsection.
14  ALAIN CONNES AND WALTER D. VAN SUIJLEKOM

Definition 2.28. Let E be a unital operator system and  : E  A a C-extension.
A boundary ideal for the extension is a closed two-sided ideal I  A such that the
quotient map q : A  A/I is completely isometric on (E)  A.

   A boundary ideal is called the Silov ideal if it contains every other boundary ideal.

   Before we analyze the relation between the Silov boundary ideal and the C-
envelope of operator systems, let us spend a few words on the topological origin
of these boundary ideals [4, Sect. 2.1] (cf. [41, Chapter 6]). Namely, let X be
a compact Hausdorff topological space and consider a linear subspace E  C(X)
that contains the constants and separates points of X. Then there is a smallest
closed subset K  X such that every function in E achieves its maximal absolute
value on K. This is called the Silov boundary of X relative to E. In terms of the
corresponding ideals we then find that

    J = {f  C(X) : f (K) = 0}

and that the quotient norm in C(X)/J is

                                          f |K = sup |f (x)|.

                                                                            xK

But then, to say that f attains its maximum on K  X amounts to saying that
 f |K = f . Thus, given the one-to-one correspondence between closed subsets
in X and closed ideals in C(X) we find that J is a Silov ideal for an E  C(X) if
and only if K is Silov boundary for E.

Example 2.29. The traditional example of the Silov boundary is given by the
continuous harmonic functions Charm(D) on the closed disc. Then by the maximum
modulus principle any harmonic function attains its maximum at the boundary of
D. The Silov boundary for this operator system is thus given by the circle and the
Silov boundary ideal is C0(D).

   We now return to the description of the C-envelopes using Silov boundary
ideals. Note that the following result is nothing but a reformulation of the results
in [35], very much in line with [4].

Proposition 2.30. Let E be a unital operator system and let  : E  A be
a C-extension. Then there exists a (necessarily unique) Silov boundary ideal J.

Moreover, the C-envelope Cenv(E) is -isomorphic to A/J.

Proof. From the universal property of the C-envelope iE : E  Cenv(E) it follows
that there is a surjective -homomorphism  : A  Cenv(E) such that    = iE.
Hence there is a -isomorphism  : A/Ker   Cenv(E) such that

    E  iE / CenvO (E)

                                         

    E  q / A/Ker 

is a commutative diagram, where q : A  A/Ker  denotes the quotient map. We
claim that J = Ker  is the Silov boundary ideal.

   Indeed, J is a boundary ideal since the restriction of q : A  A/Ker  to (E)
is q   = -1  iE which is surely a complete order isomorphism onto its range.
SPECTRAL TRUNCATIONS IN NCG AND OPERATOR SYSTEMS  15

   Next, let I  A be any boundary ideal with q : A  A/I the corresponding
quotient map. Then q   : E  A/I is a C-extension of E and thus, by the
universal property of Cenv(E) = A/J there is a surjective -homomorphism

                                             : A/I  A/J

such that   q   = q  . This means that (x + I) = x + J for all x  (E)  A.
Since  is a -homomorphism and A is generated by (E) it follows that (x + I) =
x + J for all x  A. In particular, for each x  I we have

                              0 + J = (0 + I) = (x + I) = x + J

so that I  J.

Corollary 2.31. Let E be a unital operator system and let  : E  A be a C-
extension. If A is a simple C-algebra then Cenv(E) is isomorphic to A.
Proof. Since A is simple there are no two-sided ideals and in particular the Silov
boundary ideal is trivial. In other words, the C-envelope of E is given by A.

Example 2.32. Returning to the harmonic functions on the closed disc of Example
2.29 we see that Cenv(Charm(D)) = C(D)/C0(D) = C(S1).

Example 2.33. Let  be an irrational real number and let U and V be two unitary
operators in a Hilbert space such that

                                            V U = e2iV U.

The linear span E of the operators U and V together with their adjoints and the
identity is a operator system. It is a subspace of the C-algebra generated by U and
V , which is of course nothing but the noncommutative torus A. Since the latter is
simple Corollary 2.31 applies and we conclude that the C-envelope of E is given
by the noncommutative torus A.

Remark 2.34. We urge the reader to transpose the above results to the non-unital
case by replacing C-extensions by C -extensions.

2.6. Stable equivalence for operator systems. Before we can introduce the
notion of stable equivalence, we will need to briefly digress on tensor products of
operator systems. We will base our approach on [36] which is focusing completely
on operator systems. In fact, the authors develop tensor products from the point
of view of abstract operator systems (that is to say, for matrix-ordered order unit
spaces). However, the link to concrete operator systems such as E  B(H) is
also worked out (cf. [36, Theorem 4.4]), and allows us to here make the following
`hands-on' definition. For the development of tensor products in the case of non-
unital (abstract) operator systems, we refer to [39]

Definition 2.35. Let E  B(H) and F  B(K) be operator systems. We define
the minimal tensor product E min F of E and F as the following norm closure

                                E min F = E  F  B(H  K),

where the algebraic tensor product E  F is naturally embedded in B(H  K).

   The construction of the minimal tensor product only depends on the abstract
operator system structure, and it defines a bi-functor from operator systems to op-
erator systems [36, Theorem 4.6]. In fact, this can also be seen from the concrete
viewpoint that we have adopted in the above definition. Indeed, if  : E  E
16  ALAIN CONNES AND WALTER D. VAN SUIJLEKOM

and  : F  F are complete order isomorphisms (i.e. completely isometric iso-
morphisms) then [27, Proposition 8.1.5] shows that    induces a complete order
isomorphism from E min F to E min F .

   We now come to the main topic of this section, which is stable equivalence of
operator systems. Let K denote the C-algebra of compact operators.

Definition 2.36. We say that two operator systems E and F are stably equivalent
if E min K and F min K are complete order isomorphic operator systems.

   It is immediate that this is an equivalence relation. The advantage of working
with the minimal tensor product should now become clear. In fact, if E  B(H)
and K  K(K) for Hilbert spaces H and K we find that E min K(K) is the closure
of E  K0(K) in B(H  K) where K0(K) denote finite-rank operators.

   We expect that the above notion of stable equivalence is related to a notion of
Morita equivalence for operator systems, similar to what happens in the case of
C-algebras [13], operator algebras [9] and operator spaces [28]. It is an interesting
open problem to develop such a notion and see how it reduces to the familiar notion
of Morita equivalence. In any case, we record the following result.

Proposition 2.37. (i) Let E be a unital operator system. The C-envelope of the
stabilization E min K is isomorphic to the stabilization Cenv(E)  K of the C-
envelope.
(ii) Let E and F be stably equivalent unital operator systems. Then Cenv(E) and
Cenv(F ) are stably equivalent C-algebras.

Proof. (i) Let  : E  Cenv(E) be the C-envelope of the operator system E; and
consider the map  :=  min id : E min K  Cenv(E) min K. It makes sense
since one can realize  as an inclusion of concrete operator systems. Let us show
that  is a C -extension in the sense of Definition 2.21. It is by construction a
complete isometry and is completely positive. We need to show that  : (E min
K)  (Cenv(E) min K) is a complete order isomorphism with its range R 
(Cenv(E) min K) . Let then x = y + 1  R where y = (z) for some z  E min K
and   R. Assume that x  0. This means that   0 and that y  -1
as concrete operators, i.e. in B(H  K). Let then Kn  K be an increasing
sequence of n-dimensional subspaces whose union is dense in K. Let en  B(H K)
be the orthogonal projection on H  Kn. One has enyen  -en. Let then
zn  Mn(E)  E min K with enyen = (zn). Since  is an inclusion of concrete
operator systems one has zn + en  0. The element zn + 1  (Mn(E)) is positive
in the sense of Definition 2.11. Indeed Mn(E) is a unital operator system so its state
space in the sense of positive linear functionals on Mn(E) of norm 1 is the same as
the ordinary state space of positive functionals equal to 1 on the unit en. Thus since
zn + en  0 the positivity condition of Definition 2.11 holds. We thus obtain a
sequence of positive elements vn = zn + 1  (E min K) which is norm convergent
and whose norm limit v is positive and fulfills  (v) = x. The similar argument
also applies when passing to matrices. Thus we conclude that Cenv(E)  K is a C -
extension of E min K. Let then C(E min K) = C (E min K) be the C-envelope
of E min K which exists uniquely by Theorem 2.25. From the universal property
of Definition 2.24 it then follows that there is an ideal J in Cenv(E)  K such that
(Cenv(E)  K)/J = C(E min K). A closed two-sided ideal in the tensor product
A  K of a C-algebra A by K is necessarily of the form J0  K, where J0 is the
closed ideal of A defined by J0 = {a  A | a  k  J, k  K}. Thus we have here
          SPECTRAL TRUNCATIONS IN NCG AND OPERATOR SYSTEMS                      17

J = J0  K. By definition of J the quotient map
                              q : Cenv(E)  K  (Cenv(E)  K)/J

restricts to a complete isometry on (E min K)  Cenv(E)  K. In particular, with
e  K a minimal projection, the restriction of q to iE(E)  e is a complete isometry,
and it agrees with the quotient morphism q0 : Cenv(E)  Cenv(E)/J0. Hence J0
is a boundary ideal for the C-envelope iE : E  Cenv(E), so J0 is contained in
the Silov boundary for the C-envelope which is 0. Thus J0 = 0 and the proof is
complete.
(ii) Follows from (i).

Corollary 2.38. Suppose E and F are unital C-algebras. If E and F are stably
equivalent as operator systems, they are also stably equivalent as C-algebras.

Proof. This follows from Proposition 2.37 (ii) since E = Cenv(E) and F = Cenv(F ).

2.7. Propagation number as an invariant of operator systems. Let E be
an operator system. For an integer n > 0 one lets En be the norm closure of the

linear span of products of  n elements of E. It is an operator system.

Definition 2.39. The propagation number prop(E) of the operator system E is
defined as the smallest integer n such that iE(E)n  Cenv(E) is a C-algebra.

   When no such n exists one lets prop(E) = .

Example 2.40. Returning to the example 2.29 of harmonic functions in the disk
one has by 2.32 that Cenv(Charm(D)) = C(D)/C0(D) = C(S1). The Poisson kernel

          P (z, eit)         :=  1 - |z|2
                                 |eit - z|2

gives the canonical linear section P : C(S1)  Charm(D) by the Poisson integral

                          1  
          P (f )(z) :=
                               P (z, eit)f (t)dt
             2 -

and (see [50] Theorem 11.8) this map is an isomorphism of operator systems. In

particular the propagation number of Charm(D) is equal to 1. Note that this example
shows that morphisms of operator systems between C-algebras are not in general
morphisms of C-algebras.

Proposition 2.41. The propagation number is invariant under completely isomet-
ric, complete order isomorphisms of operator systems.

Proof. This follows from the uniqueness property of the C-envelopes: given a com-

plete order isomorphism  : E  F of two operator systems there is a commuting

diagram:

          E                      /F

            iE                         iF

                                       
          Cenv (E )           / Cenv(F )

where  is a -isomorphism. Hence if prop(E) = n then we obtain that
       (iF (F ))n = (iF ((E)))n = ((iE(E)))n =  ((iE(E))n) = Cenv(F ),
18  ALAIN CONNES AND WALTER D. VAN SUIJLEKOM

and prop(F )  n = prop(E). Similarly we find prop(E)  prop(F ) which com-
pletes the proof.

Proposition 2.42. The propagation number is invariant under stable equivalence,
i.e., for any unital operator system E we have

                                    prop(E) = prop(E min K)

where K is the C-algebra of compact operators.

Proof. Suppose that prop(E) = n. Then

   iEminK(E min K)n = iEminK(E alg K)n = iE (E)n  K = Cenv(E)  K.

We conclude that prop(E min K)  n = prop(E).
   In the other direction, let us now assume that prop(E min K) = n. Then by

Proposition 2.37, one has Cenv(E  K) = Cenv(E)  K and thus the latter is the
norm closure of the linear span of the products of at most n elements of E alg K.
Let x  Cenv(E) and e  K a minimal projection. One can thus approximate x  e
by a finite sum of elements of the form

                      m = (a1  k1) · · · (an  kn), aj  E, kj  K.

One thus obtains a good approximation of x by the sum of the

                                  a1 · · · an, ek1 · · · kne = e

from which it follows that prop(E)  n = prop(E min K).

                                   3. Spectral truncations

   The basic paradigm in noncommutative geometry is given by a so-called spectral
triple (A, H, D), combining a -algebra of bounded operators on Hilbert space H
with a self-adjoint operator D with compact resolvent and bounded commutators
[D, a] for all a  A. The typical example is given by a compact Riemannian spin
manifold M where A = C(M ) and D is the Dirac operator acting on L2-spinors.
In fact, it is possible [20] to reconstruct a Riemannian spin manifold from any
spectral triple (A, H, D) satisfying certain conditions, including commutativity of
A.

   As we explained in the introduction, our goal is to extend this approach of
geometry to cases where (possibly) only part of the spectrum of D is available.
Most naturally, we may consider a spectral triple (A, H, D) where we take a cutoff
of the operator D, described by means of a spectral projection P , projecting onto
a finite number of the eigenvectors of D. Clearly, such an operator commutes with
D and, in fact, any operator that commutes with D also commutes with P so that
the truncation respects the group of isometries of the geometry. The operator D
is thus replaced by P D = P DP = DP acting as an operator on the Hilbert space
P H.

   Clearly, the -algebra A does not act on P H any more. However, we may form
the space P AP of operators which is invariant under the involution. In other
words, P AP is an operator system in B(P H). We thus come to consider the triple
(P AP, P H, P DP ).

   The advantage of this spectral description is that we now have the possibility to
work with a possibly finite-dimensional truncation of the spectral geometry, while
keeping all the isometries of the original spectral triple intact. Indeed, the isometries
     SPECTRAL TRUNCATIONS IN NCG AND OPERATOR SYSTEMS  19

of the latter are given by unitaries U such that U DU  = D and U AU  = A. Now,
since P commutes with such U , it follows that U also acts unitarily on P H while
it maps P AP and D to itself.

   We thus arrive at the following generalization of spectral triples with -algebras
of bounded operators replaced by operator systems.

Definition 3.1. An operator system spectral triple is a triple (E, H, D) where E is
a dense subspace of a (concrete) operator system E in B(H), H is a Hilbert space
and D is a self-adjoint operator in H with compact resolvent and such that [D, T ]
is a bounded operator for all T  E.

   Since states are perfectly defined on operator systems, the above triple induces
a (generalized) distance function on S(E) by setting

(2)  d(, ) = sup {|(x) - (x)| : [D, x]  1} .

                    xE

If E = A is a -algebra then this reduces to the usual distance function [19] on the
state space of the C-algebra A = A . It also agrees with the definition of quantum
metric spaces based on order-unit spaces given in [46, 37, 38]. It has been studied for
truncations in [23, 32, 31]. The properties of this metric distance function and the
notions of Gromov­Hausdorff convergence it gives rise to will be studied elsewhere.
We will here focus on a detailed analysis on the topological structure. We start
with the simplest case given by spectral truncations of the circle. As we will find
the theory is extremely rich, in fact, already in a spectral truncation of the circle
of rank 3.

3.1. Spectral truncation of the circle. We consider C(S1)  C(S1) acting
as bounded multiplication operators on L2(S1). An orthonormal basis of L2(S1)
is given in terms of Fourier theory: ek(x) = eikx for k  Z. These are of course

eigenvectors for the Dirac operator -id/dx on the circle. We consider a spectral

truncation defined by the orthogonal projection Pn onto spanC{e1, e2, . . . , en} for
some fixed n > 0. We will also write simply P = Pn. The space P C(S1)P is an
operator system and an arbitrary element T = P f P in C(S1)(n) = P C(S1)P can be
written as the following matrix with respect to the orthonormal basis spanC{ek}nk=1:

           a0 a-1 a-2 a-3 . . . a-n+1

           a1           a0 a-1 a-2 . . . a-n+2

               a2       a1   a0   a-1  ...   a-n+3  
                                                    

(3)  PfP       a3       a2   a1   a0   ...   a-n+4  
                                                    

               ...      ...  ...  ... . . .  ...    
                                                    
                                                    

          an-1 an-2 an-3 an-4 · · · a0

in terms of the Fourier coefficients {an}nZ of f  C(S1). Such matrices with
constants along all diagonals are called Toeplitz matrices. Hence the spectral trun-
cation PnC(S1)Pn is given by the Toeplitz operator system of all n × n Toeplitz
matrices. A fully general analysis of the Toeplitz system will be postponed to the
next section, including the C-envelope, the propagation number, the extreme rays

in the cone of positive elements, the pure state spaces, et cetera.

   In the next subsection we anticipate this discussion and lift the curtain on the

rich structure that is found already in the simplest non-trivial case, namely when

n = 3.
20  ALAIN CONNES AND WALTER D. VAN SUIJLEKOM

3.2. State space of the truncated circle (n = 3). We shall proceed by dis-
cussing in details the simplest non-trivial case which is n = 3, but before entering
in the details we list some properties which ought to be shared with the general
case:

        · The extreme rays of the positive cone O+ of the operator space form a circle.
          More precisely they are proportional to rank one self-adjoint idempotents
          which belong to O. They remain extreme rays in the cone of positive
          matrices.

        · The boundary O+ of the base of the positive cone O+ is the closure of
          a component of the complement of singular points in a rational algebraic
          hypersurface H.

        · The extreme points of the base of the positive cone O+ are singular points
          of the above hypersurface H.

        · The boundary S of the state space is a component of the complement of
          singular points in a rational algebraic hypersurface K.

        · The extreme points E of the state space coincide with the singular points of
          the above hypersurface K and form the quotient of a torus by the symmetric
          group.

        · Both hypersurfaces H and K are the union of a pencil of lines obtained
          from pairs of points of the singular set.

In the case of the base of the cone O+ the pencil of lines is of dimension 2 (for
n = 3) and its elements are parametrized by arbitrary pairs of points of the curve
 of extreme points. In the case of the state space the singular set of K is two
dimensional and the pencil of lines is formed of lines joining an arbitrary point of
the singular set with a precisely defined corresponding point. The pencil of lines is
also two dimensional.

3.2.1. The positive cone O+ and its extreme rays. The self-adjoint elements of the
truncated operator space P3C(S1)P3 are matrices of the form

                       u a - ib c - id 
                       a + bi u a - ib  , (a, b, c, d, u)  R5.

                          c + di a + bi u

They form a 5-dimensional real vector space O and what matters is to understand
the positive cone O+ for the operator norm. The state space is then obtained using
the dual cone and intersecting with the hyperplane (1) = 1. The coefficients of
the characteristic polynomial of the above matrix are the following

    - 2a2(c - u) - 4abd + 2b2(c + u) + u c2 + d2 - u2 ,

    - 2a2 - 2b2 - c2 - d2 + 3u2, -3u, 1

and they give a map  : O  R3.

Lemma 3.2. The cone O+ of positive elements is the closure of the open component
of (0, 0, 0, 0, 1) in the complement of the hypersurface

   H := {(a, b, c, d, u) | 2a2c - 2a2u + 4abd - 2b2c - 2b2u - c2u - d2u + u3 = 0}
SPECTRAL TRUNCATIONS IN NCG AND OPERATOR SYSTEMS  21

Proof. The elements of the cone O+ are the elements of O whose eigenvalues are
positive. Since all elements of O are self-adjoint matrices, their eigenvalues are real.
The cone O+ is convex and is the closure of its interior which consists of matrices A
whose eigenvalues are strictly positive. For A  O+ is strictly positive, the segment
joining A to the identity matrix 1 stays inside O+ and thus A belongs to the open
component of (0, 0, 0, 0, 1) in the complement of the hypersurface H. Conversely
on a path in the complement of the hypersurface H joining 1 to A the eigenvalues
remain positive since they vary continuously and cannot vanish as their product is
given by the determinant of the matrix which is

                    2a2c - 2a2u + 4abd - 2b2c - 2b2u - c2u - d2u + u3

equal to the cubic polynomial which defines H.

   Since the trace of a matrix is the sum of its eigenvalues one knows that it is > 0
on the cone O+ and hence the natural basis of the cone O+ is its intersection O+,1
with the hyperplane u = 1. The hypersurface H is then determined by the three
dimensional zero set Z of the polynomial

                (a, b, c, d) = 2a2(c - 1) + 4abd - 2b2(c + 1) - c2 - d2 + 1

and O+,1 is the closure of the open component B of (0, 0, 0, 0) in the complement of
Z. The singularities of the hypersurface Z correspond to the points of Z at which
the gradient of  vanishes. This gradient is given by

            = 4a(c - 1) + 4bd, 4ad - 4b(c + 1), 2 a2 - b2 - c , 4ab - 2d

and the points of Z on which  vanishes form the rational curve

                   := {(a, b, c, d) | a2 + b2 = 1, c = -1 + 2a2, d = 2ab}.

It is parametrized in the form

                 (a, b, c, d) = (cos(x), sin(x), cos(2x), sin(2x)) = (x)  .

Lemma 3.3. The boundary B of B is the range of  : T2 × [0, 1]  Z  R4

                                 (x, y, s) := s(x) + (1 - s)(y).

Proof. One first checks that (x, y, s)  Z. One has
               ((x, y, s)) = (s sin(2x) + (1 - s) sin(2y))2 - 2(s cos(2x)+

  +(1 - s) cos(2y) - 1)(s cos(x) + (1 - s) cos(y))2 + (s cos(2x) + (1 - s) cos(2y))2
 -4(s sin(x) + (1 - s) sin(y))(s sin(2x) + (1 - s) sin(2y))(s cos(x) + (1 - s) cos(y))

           +2(s sin(x) + (1 - s) sin(y))2(s cos(2x) + (1 - s) cos(2y) + 1) - 1.
After expanding in powers of s one finds that all coefficients vanish identically.

   Thus the range of  is contained in the hypersurface Z and we now verify that
it is contained in the boundary of the component B of the complement of Z. Let
us show that any element (x)   belongs to the boundary of B. One considers
the path given (with parameter t  [0, 1]) by

         t  p(t, x) := (1 - t)/3 ((x) + (x + 2/3) + (x + 4/3)) + t(x).
One finds that independently of x  [0, 2] one has (p(t, x)) = (t - 1)2(2t + 1),
while one has p(0, x) = 0 and p(1, x) = (x). This shows that (x)   belongs to
22  ALAIN CONNES AND WALTER D. VAN SUIJLEKOM

    Figure 1. The hypersurface Z intersected with the hyperplane
    d = -4/10. One can see 6 components of the complement, the
    central one is convex

the boundary of B. It follows by convexity of B that the range of  is contained in
the boundary of B.

   The minors of the Jacobian of the map  are

      -8(s - 1)s sin4                       x-y  sin(x + y)     
                                              2
                                            y) sin4  x-y
      8(s - 1)s cos(x +                     (sin(x)
                                            cos(y))  2            .
      16(s - 1)s sin4  x-y                                      
                         2                           + sin(y))
                                                                

      -16(s - 1)s(cos(x) +                           sin4  x-y
                                                             2

They all vanish if and only if (s-1)s sin4  x-y  = 0. This holds only if s  {0, 1} or
                                              2
if the pair (x, y) belongs to the diagonal   T2. In both cases the critical value is

on the curve . The complement of  in B is connected since B is the boundary of

the convex body B (the boundedness of B follows from the boundedness of positive

matrices of fixed trace) and is thus homeomorphic to a three dimensional sphere

which the curve  cannot disconnect. Thus the intersection of the range of  with

the complement of  in B is both open and closed (since the domain T2 × [0, 1] is

compact and critical values lie in ) and is thus equal to the complement of  in

B. Since  lies in the range of  one gets the required surjectivity.

Proposition 3.4. The extreme points of the convex set O+,1 form the curve .

Proof. The extreme points of O+,1 belong to the boundary B and hence to the
range of the map  of Lemma 3.3. The formula defining  shows that provided
(x) = (y) all the non-trivial convex combinations are not extreme points and thus
the extreme points of B are contained in . To see that any element (x)   is
            SPECTRAL TRUNCATIONS IN NCG AND OPERATOR SYSTEMS                                    23

an extreme point we note that the Toeplitz matrix associated to (x) is of the form

      1 e-ix e-2ix 1 0 0  1 1 1 1 0                                                      0

      eix 1 e-ix  = 0 eix 0  1 1 1 0 e-ix 0 

     e2ix eix           1          0 0 e2ix 1 1 1 0 0 e-2ix

which is three times a rank one idempotent and is already an extreme point among
positive matrices with fixed trace.

3.2.2. The state space and the pure states. The tangent hyperplane to B at any of

the points (x, y, s) for s  (0, 1) is governed by the equation obtained by differ-

entiating  at such points which gives, up to the overall factor 8(s - 1)s sin2                  x-y
                                                                                                  2

the vector

     {2(cos(x) + cos(y)), 2(sin(x) + sin(y)), - cos(x + y), - sin(x + y)}.

The associated linear form evaluated at any of the points (x, y, s) takes the value
cos(x - y) + 2. Replacing x  x +  and y  y +  this provides us with a two-
parameter family of supporting hyperplanes for the cone O+ given by the equation
L(a, b, c, d, u) = 0 where

            L(a, b, c, d, u) = 2a(cos(x) + cos(y)) + 2b(sin(x) + sin(y))+

               +c cos(x + y) + d sin(x + y) + u(cos(x - y) + 2).

In order to obtain a state one normalizes L. This gives us the following map

 : T2  O from the two torus T2 to the state space S of O

               (x, y)(a, b, c, d, u) :=            1          L(a, b, c, d, u).

                                              cos(x - y) + 2

Since the circle x2 + y2 = 1 is a rational curve with rational parametrization given

by

                                x  =      2t             1 - t2
                                               ,  y = t2 + 1
                                      t2  +   1

one obtains a rational parametrization of the range of the map  in the form

     W      =  4 t2v + tv2 + t + v             ,X     =             4 - 4t2v2             ,
                                              3                                          3
               t2 (3v2  + 1) +  4tv  + v2  +             3t2v2   +  t2  +  4tv  + v2  +

     Y=     t2 - v2 - 1 + 4tv + v2 - 1            ,Z  =  2 t2(-v) - tv2 + t + v
                                                                                             .
               t2 (3v2 + 1) + 4tv + v2 + 3               t2  (3v2  +    1) + 4tv  + v2   +3

By elimination of the variables (t, v) one obtains that the range is contained in the
following two quartic hypersurfaces

               W 2X2 + 2W 2Z2 - 4W XZ + 2X2Z2 = 0

and
                    W 2 X2 + 4Z2 + 4Z2 X2 + 4 Y 2 + Z2 - 1 = 0.

These equations allow one to express W as follows

     W=     -X4Z - 8X2Y 2Z - 8X2Z3 + 8X2Z - 16Y 2Z3 - 16Z5 + 16Z3

                                          2X (X2 + 4Z2)

and one just needs to understand the surface  in R3 given by the parametrization
by (X, Y, Z)(t, v) or by the equation

(4)  X4 + 8X2Y 2 + 8X2Y + 8X2Z2 + 16Y 2Z2 + 16Z4 - 16Z2 = 0.

It is represented in Figure 2.
24  ALAIN CONNES AND WALTER D. VAN SUIJLEKOM

                                Figure 2. The surface  in R3.

   The boundary S of the state space S is contained in an algebraic hypersurface
which is determined as follows. The linear form

                           L(a, b, c, d, u) = aW + bX + cY + dZ + u

belongs to the state space if and only if it takes positive values on the extreme
points of the base of the cone O+. This means using Proposition 3.4 and the
rational parametrization of the curve  that the product
(-t4X - t4Y + t4 + 2t3W - 4t3Z + 6t2Y + 2t2 + 2tW + 4tZ + X - Y + 1)(1 + t2)-2

only takes positive values. This thus means that the polynomial first factor P (t) is
positive for all t  R. If X + Y = 1, P (t) is of degree 3 and hence cannot be positive
for all t  R unless the coefficient 2W - 4Z of t3 vanishes. Since the boundary S
is topologically a sphere we can ignore this codimension 2 situation. One then has
X + Y < 1 i.e. the coefficient of t4 is positive. Then P (t) is positive for all t  R if
and only if it takes positive values where its derivative vanishes:

                                       P (t) = 0  P (t)  0.

This shows that in the boundary S one has a common root for P and P . Thus S
is contained in the zero set of the discriminant which is the following polynomial
d(W, X, Y, Z) = W 6 + 3W 4X2 + 15W 4Y 2 - 18W 4Y - 12W 4Z2 - W 4 + 108W 3XY Z
-36W 3XZ + 3W 2X4 - 78W 2X2Y 2 + 84W 2X2Z2 - 2W 2X2 + 48W 2Y 4 - 144W 2Y 3
+96W 2Y 2Z2+80W 2Y 2-144W 2Y Z2+16W 2Y +48W 2Z4+80W 2Z2-108W X3Y Z
-36W X3Z-288W XY 2Z-288W XZ3+32W XZ+X6+15X4Y 2+18X4Y -12X4Z2
-X4 +48X2Y 4 +144X2Y 3 +96X2Y 2Z2 +80X2Y 2 +144X2Y Z2 -16X2Y +48X2Z4
+80X2Z2-64Y 6-192Y 4Z2+128Y 4-192Y 2Z4+256Y 2Z2-64Y 2-64Z6+128Z4-64Z2.

   We thus get the following

Lemma 3.5. The boundary S of the state space S is contained in the hypersurface
K := {(W, X, Y, Z) | d(W, X, Y, Z) = 0}.

   We are now ready to determine the extreme points of the state space of the
operator system O.
SPECTRAL TRUNCATIONS IN NCG AND OPERATOR SYSTEMS  25

     Figure 3. Intersection of the hypersurface d(W, X, Y, Z) = 0 with Z = 0

                       Figure 4. State space intersected with Z = 0
Theorem 3.6. The map  : T2  O from the two torus T2 to the state space S
of O defines a surjective double cover of the set E of extreme points, and E is a
M¨obius strip with boundary the image () of the diagonal.
The M¨obius strip E lies in the singular set of the hypersurface d(W, X, Y, Z) = 0.
The following map  : T2 × [0, 1]  O is a surjection on the boundary S of the
state space S

                           (x, y, s) := s(x, y) + (1 - s)(x, y + ).
26                ALAIN CONNES AND WALTER D. VAN SUIJLEKOM

                100
                 80
                 60
                 40
                 20

                         1       2     3          4          5     6

    Figure 5. The graph of the numerator of the size2 of Jacobian

Proof. The sum of squares of the numerators of the minors of the Jacobian of the
map  simplifies to

    2 3 sin  x-y              3(x - y) 2
               2     + sin

                                   2
                              × (8 cos(x - y) + 4 cos(2(x - y)) + cos(3(x - y)) + 7)

which only depends upon x-y and whose graph, as a function of the single variable
x - y, is shown in Figure 5. This shows that the map  : T2  O is an immersion

except on the diagonal . One has (x, y) = (y, x) so that  passes to the quotient
of T2 by the flip s(x, y) := (y, x). Let us show that one thus obtains an injection
of T2/s in the state space S. One rewrites the components of (x, y) as a pair of
complex numbers in terms of u = eix and v = eiy using

             2 cos(x - y) = u/v + v/u, uv = cos(x + y) + i sin(x + y),

so that (x, y) determines the two complex numbers

             A = (u + v)/(4 + u/v + v/u), B = uv/(4 + u/v + v/u).

One has A/B = 1/u + 1/v and moreover

             B  - A2  =  (u2    2u3v3         B2  =     (u2  +  u4v4
                              + 4uv + v2)2 ,                    4uv + v2)2

which determines the product uv as uv = 2B2/(B -A2). Now both u, v are complex

numbers of modulus one and one knows

                     1/u + 1/v = A/B,  1/(uv)  =     1    - A2)/B2
                                                      (B
                                                     2

so that u, v are determined up to the flip. On the diagonal   T2 the map 
simplifies to

                            4 cos(x) 4 sin(x) 1                 1
             (x, x) =               ,         , cos(2x), sin(2x)
                              3        33                       3

which is a smooth embedding of S1 in O. This curve () is the boundary of the
surface  = (T2) which by the above discussion is the quotient of the two torus
T2 by the flip, or equivalently the space of un-ordered pairs of complex numbers
SPECTRAL TRUNCATIONS IN NCG AND OPERATOR SYSTEMS                            27

u, v of modulus one. Such pairs form a M¨obius strip since setting uv = 2 the pair

is determined by the element

                              u+v
                                       [-1, 1]

                               2

which depends up to sign on the choice of the square root . Thus the monodromy

along the circle is the map x  -x on the interval and the total space is a Mo¨bius

strip. One checks by direct computation that the gradient of d vanishes on  so

that the latter is contained in the singular set of the hypersurface K. It remains

to show that  = (T2) is the set E of extreme points of the state space S. Let

us first show that all other points of the boundary S are not extreme. This will

follow if we show, as stated in the theorem, that the map  is a surjection to the

boundary S. One first checks by direct computation that d((x, y, s)) = 0 for all

x, y  T and s  R. Moreover the computation of the gradient of d on (x, y, s)

gives the expression

32(s - 1)s(12s cos(x - y) - 6 cos(x - y) - cos(2(x - y)) - 5)3

                              (cos2(x - y) - 4)4

multiplied by the non-zero vector (cos(x), sin(x), - cos(2x), - sin(2x)). One can
thus check that (x, y, s) is a non-singular point of the hypersurface K when s 
(0, 1) while, as seen above, it is a singular point for s = 0 and s = 1.

   The numerator of the sum of squares of minors of the Jacobian of  simplifies to

8 (96s2 - 96s + 35) cos(x - y) - 2(2s - 1)(5 cos(2(x - y)) + 13) + cos(3(x - y)) 2

which only depends upon u := x - y and s. Solving in s gives two solutions

1                             1
s  (cos(u) + 2), s  (6 cos(u) + cos(2u) + 5) sec(u).
4                             12

The second solution lies outside the interval [0, 1]. The first solution singles out the
critical set of  as the two dimensional graph

                                     1
                      G = {(x, y, 4 (cos(x - y) + 2)) | x, y  T}.

The critical values form a circle C as obtained using the equality

         1
(x, y, (cos(x - y) + 2)) = (cos(x), sin(x), 0, 0).

         4

Let U be the range of the restriction of  to T2 × (0, 1). It is contained in the
complement of the singular set in the hypersurface K, and it is connected (as the
image of a connected set by a continuous map). It follows that U is contained in
a single component V of the complement of the singular set in the hypersurface
K. The intersection of U with the complement V \ C of C in V is both open and
closed: it is open because the map  is open at any element of the pre-image, it is
closed since it agrees with the intersection of (T2 × [0, 1]) with V \ C. Now since
C is a one dimensional circle and V is three dimensional the complement V \ C of
C in V is connected. It follows that U = V since the circle C is by construction
in U . It remains to show that V is equal to the boundary S. We know that S
is homeomorphic to a sphere S3 and that it is contained in the hypersurface K.
The above proof shows that V  S and hence that the same holds for the closure
of V , one has V  S. Now the boundary S is necessarily a union of closures
of components of the complement of the singular set in the hypersurface K. This
follows from the invariance of domain [12]. Indeed since the boundary S is a
28  ALAIN CONNES AND WALTER D. VAN SUIJLEKOM

topological sphere contained in K, whenever a point x  S is a non-singular point
of K, one can consider the injective continuous map from a small neighborhood of
x in S to K given by inclusion and, since a neighborhood of x in K is a standard
ball one knows by the result of Brouwer that the image of the map is open. This
suffices to show that the intersection of S with the complement of the singular
set in K is both closed and open and is thus a union of components. Now if S
contained another component than V it would become disconnected after removing
the boundary of V . But the boundary of V is the Mo¨bius strip  = (T2) and the
complement of a M¨obius strip in the sphere S3 is always connected. This shows
that V is equal to the boundary S and completes the proof of the theorem.

               4. Toeplitz operator systems: general structure

   This section contains a detailed analysis of the Toeplitz matrices, viewed as
operator systems inside the matrices with complex coefficients. We will apply the
techniques and concepts developed in Section 2 and find that the rich structure
found by direct computations in the previous section exists for general n.

4.1. Toeplitz matrices. Let us start by giving the general definition of the Toeplitz
operator system.

Definition 4.1. The operator system C(S1)(n)  Mn(C) of n × n complex-valued
Toeplitz matrices is defined by the vector space of matrices with constant diagonals,
i.e. of the form

                        t0 t-1 · · · t-n+2 t-n+1

                        t1                 t0 t-1                  t-n+2

                         ...                              ...      ...  
                                                          ...           
    T :=  tk-l  kl  =                      t1   t0                      
                                                ...
                                                                        

                                                                         
                       tn-2                                        t-1 

                         tn-1 tn-2 · · · t1                        t0

with tk  C for k = -n + 1, . . . , n - 1.

Proposition 4.2. We have the following isomorphism of C-algebras:
                                     Cenv(C(S1)(n)) = Mn(C).

Moreover, independently of n one has prop(C(S1)(n)) = 2.

Proof. Note that the Toeplitz matrices generate all complex matrices so that Mn(C)
is a C-extension of C(S1)(n). Since Mn(C) is simple, it follows from Corollary 2.31
that this extension is the C-envelope.

   In order to compute the propagation number we use a basis {j}j=-n+1,...,n-1
for the Toeplitz matrices given by 1's on the j'th diagonal and zeroes elsewhere,

i.e. for positive k we have

                    n-k                              n-k

          k = ei,i+k;                          -k =       ei+k,i.

                    i=1                              i=1

It then follows that for any k, p  0 we have

                                           n-p-k

                    k-p-k =                       ej+p,j

                                           j=1
             SPECTRAL TRUNCATIONS IN NCG AND OPERATOR SYSTEMS                                   29

which is a matrix that only has non-zero entries on the (-p)'th diagonal: there it
is equal to 1 except for the last k entries of that diagonal (where it vanishes). Since
k and p are arbitrary we get all matrix units eij for i  j. Taking adjoints we also
get the lower-diagonal matrix units and the proof is complete.

4.2. The Fej´er­Riesz operator system. We consider functions on S1 with only

a finite number of non-zero Fourier coefficients. More precisely we define as follows
the so-called Fej´er­Riesz operator system C(Z)(n):

(5)          C(Z)(n) = {a = (ak)kZ : supp(a)  (-n, n)} .

The elements in C(Z)(n) are thus given by sequences with finite support

     a = (. . . , 0, a-n+1, a-n+2, . . . , a-1, a0, a1, . . . , an-2, an-1, 0, . . .)

and this allows to view C(Z)(n) as an operator subsystem of the convolution C-
algebra C(Z) = C(S1). The adjoint a  a is given by ak = a-k. Note that
self-adjoint elements in C(Z)(n) are thus given by so-called palindromic sequences

for which ak = a-k for |k|  n - 1. Also, an element a is positive, a  0, if and
only if it is positive in C(Z) = C(S1), i.e. k akk for || = 1 defines a positive
function on S1.

Proposition 4.3. (1) The following defines an action of S1 by complete order
          automorphisms of C(Z)(n):

                                   (ak)  (kak); (  S1).

    (2) The Silov boundary of the operator system C(Z)(n) is S1.
    (3) The C-envelope of C(Z)(n) is given by C(Z).
    (4) The propagation number is infinite.

Proof. For (1) observe that for a positive a we have that k akk is a positive
function on S1. But then the same applies to k ak()k as this amounts to a
translation in S1.

   For (2) note that the natural C-extension is given by C(S1) which contains
C(Z)(n) as a subsystem. For n > 1 one has 1, cos(), sin()  C(Z)(n) so that the
system separates points. In particular, there exists a function in C(Z)(n) attaining
a unique maximum at some point in S1. By translating this function over S1 one
remains in the operator system, while showing that for each point in S1 there exists
a function in C(Z)(n) that attains its unique maximum there. In other words, the
Silov boundary is all of S1. But then also (3) follows by Proposition 2.30.

   The final statement follows from the fact that sums of products of k elements of
C(Z)(n) all belong to C(Z)(nk) which is strictly smaller than C(Z).

   The following old factorization result by Fej´er [30] and Riesz [47], plays a key
role (and this is why we named the above operator system C(Z)(n) after them).

Lemma 4.4. Let m  0 and let I  [-m, m] be an interval of length m+1. Suppose

that p(z) =  m     pk  zk  is  a  Laurent  polynomial  such  that  p( )    0  for      all      C
             k=-m

for which || = 1. Then there exists a Laurent polynomial q(z) = kI qkzk so
that p() = |q()|2 for all   S1  C.

A proof can be found in [33, Theorem 1.12].

Proposition 4.5. Let C(Z)(n) be the operator system defined in Equation (5).
30              ALAIN CONNES AND WALTER D. VAN SUIJLEKOM

    (1) The extreme rays in (C(Z)(n))+ are given by the elements a  (C(Z)(n))+,
         a = (ak) for which the Laurent series k akzk has all its zeroes on the circle
         S1.

    (2) The pure states of C(Z)(n) are given by the functionals a  k akk for
         any   S1.

Proof. (1) Let a  (C(Z)(n))+. Suppose that the Laurent series P (z) = k akzk
has a zero z0 such that |z0| < 1. Since a = a this Laurent series also has a zero at
1/z0. We may thus factorize

                                  P (z) = (z - z0)(1/z - z0)Q(z)

for a Laurent series Q(z) = k bkzk where bk = 0 for |k| > n - 2. Since (z -
z0)(z - z0) is (strictly) positive when restricted to |z| = 1, we also have that Q(z)
is positive when restricted to the circle. Moreover, there exists  > 0 such that

(z - z0)(z - z0) -   0 for |z| = 1. Thus (z - z0)(1/z - z0) =  + c is the sum of
two elements of (C(Z)(2))+, and a = b + cb is not extremal. We conclude that if
P (z) has a zero outside the circle, then a is not extremal.

   Suppose now that P (z) = k akzk has all its 2n - 1 zeroes on the circle. If
b  (C(Z)(n))+ fulfills b  a, then k bkzk = Q(z)  P (z) for |z| = 1. Then, at
a zero of P (z) of multiplicity k, Q(z) has a zero of multiplicity at least equal to k.

This shows that Q(z) is a scalar multiple of P (z) and the proof of (1) is complete.
   For (2) we use that we can extend a pure state on C(Z)(n) to a pure state of

C(S1), thus given by evaluation in a point of S1. In view of the symmetry given
by the action of S1 on C(Z)(n) we conclude that all pure states of C(S1) restrict
to pure states of C(Z)(n).

4.3. Duality with the Toeplitz operator system. In this section we analyze a
duality between the operator systems C(S1)(n) and C(Z)(n) for any n  0. The
advantage of this duality will become clear soon, when we analyze the pure state
space and extremal positive elements in C(S1)(n).

Proposition 4.6. There is a complete order isomorphism between the operator
system C(S1)(n) and the dual of C(Z)(n). For any Toeplitz matrix T = (tk-l)k,l
the functional T  (C(Z)(n))d is given by T (a) = k akt-k where a = (ak) 
C  (Z)(n) .

Proof. Since the vector space pairing given by the formula k akt-k is clearly non-
degenerate, we simply have to check that T  T respects the matrix-order and
the order unit. Let I = {0, . . . , n - 1}  (-n, n). In view of Lemma 4.4, an element
a  C(Z)(n) is positive if and only if it can be written as a convolution product
b  b for some b  C(Z)(I). One has, with bk = 0 k / I,

                               (b  b)(j) = bkbj+k , j, |j| < n

where the summation takes place for k  I  (I - j). This intersection is non empty
for j  (-n, n). One has using j + k = l  j = l - k

    T (b  b) =  (b  b)(j)t-j = bkbj+kt-j = bkbltk-l = b|T b

                j(-n,n)  k,j  k,l

since (T )k = l tk-ll for any   2(I). Positivity of this expression is equivalent
to the positivity of the Toeplitz form, i.e. T  0 if and only if T  0.
SPECTRAL TRUNCATIONS IN NCG AND OPERATOR SYSTEMS  31

   We show that for the order unit 1  C(S1)(n) the functional 1 is a faithful state
on C(Z)(n). Since for a = b  b one has 1(a) = k |bk|2 the result follows.

   This duality allows us to move smoothly between the following three structures:
     (1) a positive Toeplitz matrix T  C(S1)(+n);
     (2) a positive linear functional  on C(Z)(n);
     (3) a positive quadratic form Q on C(Z)I of elements of sequences with sup-

          port in an interval I  Z of length n.

In fact, these three structures are equivalent and related via the formulas:

    12:           (a) = tka-k;
    23:           (  ) = Q(, );

    13:           , T  = Q(, ).

With respect to these structures, we will be interested in Ker T ,  and both the
radical and kernel of Q where we recall that

                                 = a  C(Z)(n) : (a) = 0 ,
                          rad(Q) =   C(Z)(I) : Q(, ) = 0  ,
                          Ker(Q) =   C(Z)(I) : Q(, ) = 0  .

Lemma 4.7. (1) For positive quadratic forms Q the radical and kernel coin-

          cide.
    (2) We have ()+ = {   :   Ker Q}.

Proof. (1) is a straightforward application of the Cauchy­Schwartz inequality. For

(2) note that if a  ()+ then since a  0 by Lemma 4.4 it follows that a =   .
But then Q(, ) = (  ) = (a) = 0. The other inclusion is obvious.

   If no confusion can arise, we will also write + = ()+ for the positive elements
in the kernel of the linear functional .

4.4. Pure states of the Toeplitz operator system. We will determine the
pure states of C(S1)(n), as well as the extreme rays in the cone C(S1)+(n) of positive
Toeplitz matrices. Here the duality with C(Z)(n) will turn out to be very useful, as
it permits a simpler analysis and conceptual understanding of these extreme sets.

We introduce the following notation:

       1          z2       zn-1 t  Cn
fz  =       1  z      ···
         n

for any z  C. It is a column of a Vandermonde matrix (cf. Equation (16) below).

Proposition 4.8. Let C(S1)(n) be the Toeplitz operator system.

    (1) The extreme rays in C(S1)+(n) are given by (multiples of ) () = |f f|
          for any   S1. In other words, the extreme rays T = (tk-l)k,l are of the
          form tk = k (up to a positive real number) for some || = 1.

    (2) The pure states of C(S1)(n+1) are given by functionals T  , T  where
          the vector  = (0, . . . , n)  Cn+1 is such that the polynomial z  k kzn-k
          has all its zeroes on S1.

    (3) The pure state space P(C(S1)(n+1)) = Tn/Sn is the quotient of the n-torus

          by the symmetric group on n objects.
32   ALAIN CONNES AND WALTER D. VAN SUIJLEKOM

Proof. For the first two statements we use duality in the form of Corollary 2.20

and Proposition 4.6. Proposition 4.5 determines pure states and extreme rays in
the dual system (C(Z)(n))+. The extreme rays in C(S1)(+n) are given by pure
states on (C(Z)(n))+ i.e. by evaluation at points of S1. Up to   -1 = , they
correspond to the (). A pure state of C(S1)(n+1) corresponds to an extreme ray
in (C(Z)(n+1))+ and hence to an element a  (C(Z)(n+1))+, a = (ak) for which
the Laurent series k akzk has all its zeroes on the circle S1. Since a  0 by
Lemma 4.4 it follows that a =   . Then the vector   Cn+1 is such that the
polynomial z  k kzn-k has all its zeroes on S1. For the third statement, let
the zeroes of k kzn-k be labelled 1, . . . , n (taken with multiplicities). Then,
up to normalization, we can write  in terms of elementary symmetric polynomials

in the k's:

        1

         k k 
                          
(6)     =      k<l  k  l    ,

               ...        
                          
                          

               1 · · · n

which gives, using (2) the required identification P(C(S1)(n+1)) = Tn/Sn.

   Note that this type of duality between cones of positive elements is central in the
theory of matrix completion and moments, and appears for instance in [6, Section
1.1].

   As an example let us consider the case C(S1)(3). The description of extreme rays
in Proposition 4.8 agrees with Proposition 3.4. The pure state space of C(S1)(3) is
given in Proposition 4.8 by vector states | | with  of the form

(7)  =  1              1
                       eix + eiy ,
        4 + 2 cos(x - y) ei(x+y)

where x, y  [0, 2). This confirms the result from the previous section where we
found in Theorem 3.6 that this Mo¨bius strip is the pure state space of C(S1)(3) (cf.
Figure 2).

4.5. The cone of positive Toeplitz matrices. We now apply the above operator
system duality to arrive at a description of the cone C(S1)+(n). This generalizes the
analysis done in Section 3 to arbitrary dimension.

   As a first powerful application of the duality we derive a classical result of
Carath´eodory from 1911 [15] stating that positive semi-definite Toeplitz matrices
allow for a so-called Vandermonde factorization (see also [1] and [33, Chapter 4]).
More recently, the value of these kind of factorizations has been rediscovered in the
context of signal analysis (cf. [43, 5, 53] and [6] for a mathematical treatment). But
our main finding is the extension to the general case of the peculiar properties of
the hypersurface which determines the boundary of the cone C(S1)+(n). As shown
below in Theorem 4.15 this hypersurface admits a remarkable stratification by the
degree of singularity of its points and this stratification corresponds to the rank of
positive Toeplitz matrices, thus extending the results of the special case n = 3 to
the general case. We start with some preparation.
SPECTRAL TRUNCATIONS IN NCG AND OPERATOR SYSTEMS  33

Lemma 4.9. The cone C(S1)+(n) of positive elements is the closure of the open
component of the identity matrix in the complement of the hypersurface defined
by H := {T  C(S1)(n) : det(T ) = 0}. In particular, the boundary of C(S1)(+n)
coincides with the boundary in the complement of H of the component of 1.

Proof. The proof is completely analogous to Lemma 3.2 above but let us for conve-
nience include it here for the general case. The cone is convex and is the closure of
its interior which consists of matrices whose eigenvalues are strictly positive. The
segment joining T to the identity matrix 1 stays inside C(S1)+(n) and thus T belongs
to the open component of 1 in the complement of the hypersurface H. Conversely
on a path in the complement of this hypersurface joining 1 to T the eigenvalues
remain positive since they vary continuously and cannot vanish as their product is
given by the determinant.

   A face F of a convex cone C  E, in a real linear space, is a sub-cone F  C
which is hereditary i.e.

                               x  F and 0 C y C x  y  F.

The intersection of C with the real linear span L(F ) of F is equal to F , since one
has L(F ) = F - F . Moreover if C is proper, i.e. C  -C = {0} the projection
p(C)  E/L(F ) of C in the quotient is still proper.

Lemma 4.10. Let  be a positive linear functional on C(Z)(n).
a) + is a face of (C(Z)(n))+.
b) (+)+ is a face of C(S1)(+n); it is the face generated by .

Proof. For (a) we suppose a  + and b  a in (C(Z)(n))+. Then (b)  (a) = 0
so b  +. Let us prove the second claim. Let F be the face of  and L(F ) = F -F
its linear span. Then

                            a  +  a  (C(Z)(n))+  L(F )

which is the dual of the projection of the cone in the quotient by L(F ). This
projection is a proper cone, thus its dual is spanning and we get

                            (+)+    C(S1)+(n)  L(F ) = F

since the projection of  is 0 in the quotient by L(F ).

Proposition 4.11. The extreme rays of a face F in a cone K are extreme rays in
K.

Proof. Let x be extreme in F but suppose it is not extreme in K. Then there is an
y in K such that y  x. Since x is a point of a face, it follows that y  F , and by
extremality of x in F we find that y = x.

Theorem 4.12. Let T be a rank r  n - 1 positive Toeplitz matrix. Then the
face generated by T is a cone based on a simplex of dimension r whose extreme
points are the (i) where the 1, . . . , r are the common roots of () = 0 for all
  Ker T .

Proof. Since (+)+ is a face, it is generated by extreme rays () where the 
are exactly the common zeroes of all   Ker Q. Let us denote these zeroes by
1, . . . , m for m  n - 1. By linear independence of the vectors f1 , . . . fm it
34                ALAIN CONNES AND WALTER D. VAN SUIJLEKOM

follows that the (1), . . . , (m) are linearly independent. This implies that the
face generated by T is a cone based on an r-dimensional simplex with extreme
points (1), . . . , (m). But then dually we must have dim() = n - m so that
it follows that the rank of T is equal to m. This completes the proof.

   We can reformulate this as the following Vandermonde factorization of positive
Toeplitz matrices.

Corollary 4.13. Let T be a positive n × n Toeplitz matrix of rank r  n - 1. Then
T can be written in the following form:

                                              T = V V ,

where  is some positive diagonal matrix and V is an n × r Vandermonde matrix,

    d1                                                1              1 ··· 1 

            d2                                    1  1               2 · · · n 
    =             ...     ;                  V =                                     ,
                                                      n    ...                  ...  
                                                                                     
                        dr

                                                        n1 -1 n2 -1 · · · rn-1

for unique values d1, . . . , dr > 0 and 1, . . . , r  S1  C.

Theorem 4.14. Let T be an n × n Toeplitz matrix of arbitrary rank. Then T  0
if and only if T is of the following form:

                                    T = V V ,

where  is some positive diagonal matrix and V is a Vandermonde matrix,

    d1                                                1              1 ··· 1 

            d2                                    1  1               2 · · · n 
    =             ...      ;                 V =                                     ,
                                                      n    ...                  ...  
                                                                                     
                        dn

                                                           n1 -1 2n-1 · · · nn-1

for some d1, . . . , dn  0 and 1, . . . , n  S1  C.

Proof. We take a base for the cone C(S1)(+n) by fixing the trace of the Toeplitz
matrices to be n. Note that this is a compact set.

    Let T be a matrix of rank n with trace 1 and take an arbitrary extreme point ().

We consider a line segment from () to T and prolong this segment until it reaches

a point T on the boundary of the (compact) base of the cone. Since elements in

the boundary of the cone of positive elements have vanishing determinant (Lemma

4.9), the rank of T is n - 1. Hence the above Theorem applies and we may write

T=  n-1  dk  (k )  for  some  dk ,  k .  Since T  = tT     + (1 - t)() for some t  (0, 1)
    k=1
                   n-1
we may write T =   k=1  tdk  (k )   +    (1  -  t)()  and       the  proof  is  complete.

   Given the above concrete realization of the extreme elements, we may wonder
how they are related to the singular points of the hypersurface H defined by det T =
0. In particular, we would like to generalize to arbitrary n the results of the previous
section where we found the extreme points of C(S1)(+3) (with fixed trace) to coincide
with the singular points on H.

   Since H is defined to be the zero-set of det T we may analyze the singular points
by looking at the partial derivatives of det T . The determinant of a matrix is
a multilinear function of the entries of the matrix and the partial derivatives of
any order with respect to the entries are given by the minors. When det T is
SPECTRAL TRUNCATIONS IN NCG AND OPERATOR SYSTEMS                                            35

evaluated on Toeplitz matrices it is no longer multilinear but we shall show that

the singularities of det T are still related to the rank of T . Let us denote the
Fr´echet derivative of a functional f on the real vector space C(S1)(hn) by D(k)(f );
when evaluated at an element T  C(S1)h(n) it is a linear functional on (C(S1)h(n))k
defined by

D(k)(f )(T, T1    ···    Tk )  =      ···      det(T  +  t1T1  +  · · · tkTk)|t1=···=tk=0,
                                  t1       tk

where T1, · · · , Tk  C(S1)(hn).
   In the case at hand, there is a natural stratification of the determinant hyper-

surface given by the degree of vanishing of det T

                             · · ·  Sk  Sk-1  · · ·  S1  S0 = H
where at level k one imposes the many conditions

Sk = T  H : D(k) det(T ) = 0, D(k-1) det(T ) = 0, . . . , det(T ) = 0 .

We will say that T has multiplicity k + 1 in the hypersurface H if T  Sk.

Theorem 4.15. In the boundary of the cone C(S1)+(n) the stratification of the
singular set of H coincides with the stratification by the rank. More precisely, T
has multiplicity m if and only if T has rank n - m for any m = 0, . . . n - 1.

Proof. Assume that T has rank  r. Then with q  n - 1 - r we have

                             det (T + s1(1) + . . . + sq(q)) = 0

for arbitrary s1, . . . , sq  0 and 1, . . . , q  S1. This implies that

                              D(q)(det)(T, (1)  · · ·  (q)) = 0

for all 1, . . . , q  S1. Since by Theorem 4.14 the Toeplitz matrices are in the linear
span of ()'s this implies that D(q)(det) vanishes at T . Thus, T has multiplicity
m with m = n - r.

   In the other direction, for any k let us suppose that T has rank r > n - 1 - k
for some k. Then there are s1, . . . , sk and 1, . . . , k such that

                              det (T + s1(1) + . . . + sq(q) = 0.

Since the (j) have rank one, this determinant is a polynomial of order k in the
s1, . . . , sk so that we find that D(k)(det)(T ) = 0 for this k. Hence T / Sk and the
proof is complete.

4.6. Distance on spectral truncations of the circle. We now compute the
distance on the state space of C(S1)(n), using the formula

                        d(, ) := sup{|(A) - (A)| | [D, A]  1}.

where D is the Dirac operator on the circle (cf. Section 3.1 above). We use only
self-adjoint elements A = A  C(S1)s(na) in this formula. The distance is in fact
determined by the following norm A D on the quotient C(S1)(sna)/R1 of the real
vector space C(S1)s(na) of Toeplitz selfadjoint matrices by the scalar ones:

                                           A D := [D, A] .
36        ALAIN CONNES AND WALTER D. VAN SUIJLEKOM

More precisely one takes as the dual of C(S1)s(na)/R1 the subspace C(Z)0(n) of
(C(Z)(n))sa given by linear forms which vanish on scalars. In the above formula

one has  -   C(Z)0(n), and the distance is determined by

(8)       d(, ) = sup{|( - )(A)| | A D  1},

so that, using the dual norm · D of · D, one gets

(9) d(, ) =  -  D,  D := sup |(A)| | A D  1 ,   C(Z)0(n).

The commutator [D, A] is a Toeplitz matrix of trace 0 and one has a linear map 
from selfadjoint Toeplitz matrices to themselves given by

(10)      A := i[D, A].

Thus the unit ball for the norm A D is obtained by pulling back, by the map 
the unit ball of the Toeplitz norm in the subspace of elements of trace 0. Now the
latter is the intersection of two convex sets C± where

                       C± := {A  C(S1)(sna) | Tr(A) = 0, 1 ± A  0}.

The polar of a convex subset C  E of a real vector space E is defined as

                              Co := {L  E | L()  1 ,   C}.

We have:

Proposition 4.16. (i) The map  gives an isomorphism  : C(S1)s(na)/R1 
C(S1)(sna,)0 (with Toeplitz matrices of trace 0).
(ii) The transpose t of  is an isomorphism (C(Z)(n))sa/R1  C(Z)(0n).
(iii) The unit ball of C(Z)0(n) for the norm · D is the projection by the map t
of the unit ball of the dual ·  of the Toeplitz operator norm.

(iv) The unit ball of C(Z)(0n) for the norm · D is the convex hull of the polars

of -1C±  C(S1)s(na )/R1.

Proof. (i) It is an isomorphism from the quotient by the kernel R1 to the range.
(ii) The transpose t is similarly an isomorphism from the quotient by its kernel
R1 with its range.
(iii) The unit ball for the norm · D is described as the subset of C(Z)0(n)

                           D  1  |(A)|  1 , A | A  1.

If  = t() with    1 one gets, using (A) = t()(A) = ((A))

          A, A  1  |(A)| = |((A))|  1.

This shows that the projection by the map t of the unit ball of the dual · 
is contained in the unit ball of C(Z)0(n) for the norm · D. Conversely one
can identify the dual of C(S1)s(na,)0 with (C(Z)(n))sa/R1 since 1  C(Z)(n) pairs
trivially with Toeplitz matrices with trace 0. Then let   C(Z)(0n),  D  1.
Let 0 be the linear functional on C(S1)(sna,)0 uniquely defined by

                                          0((A)) := (A).

Since  D  1 the norm of 0, as a functional on a subspace of the normed space
C(S1)s(na), is  1. Thus by Hahn­Banach it extends to an element  with    1.
Moreover one has (A) = 0((A)) = (A), A.
            SPECTRAL TRUNCATIONS IN NCG AND OPERATOR SYSTEMS       37

(iv) The unit ball of the Toeplitz norm in the subspace of elements of trace 0 is

the intersection of the two convex sets C± and thus its image by the inverse of the
isomorphism  is the intersection of the -1C±  C(S1)(sna)/R1. We then use the
general fact that for closed convex sets the polar of an intersection is the convex

hull of the polars, as follows from the bipolar theorem.

   We now determine the polar of -1C±  C(S1)(sna)/R1.

Lemma 4.17. (i) An element   C(Z)(0n) belongs to the polar of C- if and only
if the linear form  =  + 1 belongs to the state space S of C(S1)(n).
(ii) The polar of -1C-  C(S1)s(na)/R1 is tS.

Proof. (i) One has (1) = 1 by construction and (A) = (A) for any A 
C(S1)(sna,)0. Moreover for such an A one has A  C-  1 - A  0 and thus

         ((A)  1 , A  C-)  ((1 - A)  0 , A  C-)    S

since the elements of the form 1 - A, A  C- are the positive Toeplitz matrices of
fixed trace = n and form a base of the positive cone C(S1)(+n).
(ii) Given an isomorphism T : E  F of finite dimensional real vector spaces and
a subset X  E, the polar of T (X)  F is the image by the inverse of T t of the
polar of X. Applying this to the isomorphism -1 : C(S1)s(na,)0  C(S1)(sna)/R1 one
gets that the polar of -1C-  C(S1)s(na)/R1 is the image by t of the polar of C-
and by (i) one obtains tS.

   One passes from C- to C+ by multiplication by -1 and the same holds for the
polars. Thus Lemma 4.17 also determines the polar of -1C+ as -tS.

Proposition 4.18. The unit ball of C(Z)0(n) for the norm · D is the convex hull
of tS and -tS.

Proof. This follows from (iv) of Proposition 4.16 and Lemma 4.17.

Coming back to Proposition 4.16 (iii), note that it is not true that the dual

  ·  of the Toeplitz operator norm is the operator norm in C(Z)(n). In fact in
the limit n   the Toeplitz operator norm becomes the L norm and its dual is

the L1 norm. This suggests to compare the norm · D with the image by t of the

quotient norm of the L1 norm in (C(Z)(n))sa/R1. We show that the norm · 

on C(Z)(n) dual to the Toeplitz operator norm is larger than the L1 norm for the

normalized  Haar  measure  |dz|  on  S1.
                           2

Proposition 4.19. (i) Let a = (ak)  (C(Z)(n))sa with Laurent series a(z) :=
   k akzk, then one has

(11)                       a  1              |a(z)| |dz| =  a 1.
                                   2
                                          S1

(ii) The norm · D fulfills the inequality

(12)                             a D  inf b 1.

                                               t (b)=a

Proof. (i) The unit ball for the Toeplitz operator norm in C(S1)s(na) is the interval
[-1, 1] i.e. intersection of 1-C(S1)(+n) and -1+C(S1)(+n), thus its polar is the convex
38    ALAIN CONNES AND WALTER D. VAN SUIJLEKOM

hull in (C(Z)(n))sa of the polars and it suffices to show that each is contained in
the unit ball of the norm a 1. One has

                         (1 - C(S1)+(n))  1    0 and (1)  1

and since the positive elements of (C(Z)(n))sa are positive functions on S1 (i.e. the
associated Laurent polynomial is positive) the L1 norm is simply the integral and
the latter is (1)  1. By symmetry the polar of -1 + C(S1)(+n) is also contained
in the unit ball of the L1 norm.
(ii) The norm · D is, by Proposition 4.16 (iii) the image of the norm ·  by
the projection associated to the map  thus the statement follows from (i).

   Note the infimum which appears in formula (12). It is directly related to the
fact that the geodesic distance is computed using the shortest path between two
points. More precisely we take n =  and consider the distance between two
points x, y of the circle incarnated as the associated Dirac masses x, y viewed as
states. Then the choice of an element a such that a = x - y is unique up to
the addition of a constant. It contains ± times the characteristic function of the
two intervals joining x and y as well as affine combinations of these two solutions.
One finds that the infimum taken in formula (12), where we use the L1 norm in
the limit n = , corresponds to the choice of the shortest interval. Moreover the
L1 norm of the characteristic function of the interval is the distance between x and
y. To go further in the exploration of the distance function on the truncated circle
involves understanding how the state space converges to the space of probability
measures on S1 and the distance to the Kantorovich metric. By Theorem 3.7 of
[14], the Kantorovich distance dT (µ, ) between two probability measures µ,  on
S1 is computed by the formula

(13)  dT (µ, ) = |(x) - a|dx, (x) = µ([0, x]) - ([0, x])

      S1

and where the constant a is such that the integral is minimal. The derivatives of

the functions µ([0, x]) and ([0, x]) give µ and  and we see that Proposition 4.16

(iii) is the version of the above formula for dT for the truncated circle. Thus we
obtain

Theorem 4.20. (i) The distance function on the state space S of the operator
system C(S1)(n) is given for ,   S and primitives , t = , , t =  by

                                    d(, ) = inf  -  - c .

                                                                      cR

(ii) The distance function on the state space S is larger than the Kantorovich dis-
tance dT (, ) of the associated probability measures on the circle.

Proof. (i) Follows from (9) combined with Proposition 4.16 (iii).
(ii) The inequality (11) gives

      --c   --c 1

combining with (i) one gets

      d(, ) = inf  -  - c   inf  -  - c 1.
      cR                     cR

Thus the result follows from (13) which shows that the last term is dT (, ).
      SPECTRAL TRUNCATIONS IN NCG AND OPERATOR SYSTEMS  39

   These results relate Connes' distance formula for the truncated system to the
explicit integral formula for the Kantorovich distance. More general results relating
the distance on a spectral truncation of a given geometry to the Kantorovich dis-
tance on probability measures can be obtained from [23, Proposition 3.6]. Indeed,
from its very definition it is clear that Connes' distance formula for a Riemannian
spin geometry coincides with Kantorovich's formulation of the distance formula on
the state space of probability measures. Note that this formed the basis for the de-
velopment of compact quantum metric spaces [45] (see also [24] for a nice overview
of the relation between the relevant distance functions).

                           5. Toeplitz and circulant matrices

   There is an interesting relation between the Toeplitz operator system C(S1)(n)
discussed in the previous section and the group algebra of the cyclic group Cm of
order m = 2n - 1. We first recall the structure of this group algebra and the finite
Fourier transform and formulate it in terms of operator systems.

5.1. Fourier transform on the cyclic group of order m. Let m > 0 and

consider the finite abelian group Cm := Z/mZ. The point-wise action of l(Cm)
on l2(Cm) is given by:

(14)  g · (k) = g(k)(k); (g  l(Cm),   l2(Cm), k  Cm).

In terms of the standard basis of l2(Cm) this becomes matrix-multiplication by a
diagonal matrix diag(g(0), . . . , g(m - 1)).

   The finite Fourier transform is a map F : l2(Cm)  l2(Cm) defined by

                                       m-1

                  F ()(k) = (l)kl

                      l=0

with  a primitive m'th root of unity. The inverse finite Fourier transform F is
given by the same formula with  replaced by . It is well-known that m-1/2F is
unitary (Plancherel) so that FF = FF = m and that both F and F replace the
convolution product

                                                                         m-1

                                    f g(k) := f (k - l)g(l)

                                                                          l=0

by the point-wise product since the Haar measures used to define them and  are the
same. Thus the Fourier transform is an isomorphism of the group algebra C(Cm)
with l(Cm), F (f  g) = F f · F g. The unitary U = m-1/2F conjugates the above
representation (14) of l(Cm) with the action of the group algebra C(Cm) on
l2(Cm) by convolution product

                    f   = U (F (f ) · U ) , f  C(Cm),   l2(Cm).

The action by convolution of an element c = (cl)  C(Cm) in terms of the standard
basis of l2(Cm) is the following matrix acting on column vectors

            c0 cm-1 · · · c2 c1 

            c1    c0 cm-1                   c2 

             ...      c0 . . .              ...  

(15)  c           c1                                .
                                                 

                      ...  ...                    
                                                  
           cm-2                             cm-1

           cm-1 cm-2 · · · c1 c0
40                 ALAIN CONNES AND WALTER D. VAN SUIJLEKOM

Such a matrix is called a circulant matrix, it is a special case of a Toeplitz matrix.

    If we write as before

                                        1

                                   1z
(16)                       fz   =            ...   ;     z  C,
                                     m             
                                                   
                                        

                                             zm-1

then the Fourier transform can be written in terms of the canonical basis of l2(Cm)
as a Vandermonde matrix which is F = m1/2U with U unitary

            1 1 · · ·              1

            1  · · ·               m-1 

      F  =    ...  ...     ...          ...       ,      U = f1 f · · · fm-1
                                                  
                                                  

              1 m-1 · · · (m-1)(m-1)

with  =  a primitive m'th root of unity. Consequently, U = m-1/2F is the
transformation matrix that diagonalizes the above circulant matrix (15).

   The finite Fourier transform can be understood nicely in terms of a duality of
finite-dimensional operator systems, very similar to Proposition 4.6 above.

Proposition 5.1. (i) The operator system C(Cm) is its dual under the pairing

           C(Cm) × C(Cm)  C, f, g C(Cm) := (f g)(0) = fl g-l.

                                                                                                                           l

(ii) The following pairing gives a duality between C(Cm) and l(Cm)
                   C(Cm) × l(Cm)  C

                                     (c, g)  c, F g C(Cm) = cl g(k)kl.

                                                                                                      l,k

Proof. (i) The Fourier transform F is an isomorphism of the operator system

C(Cm) with l(Cm) and the latter system is its own dual under the pairing
 h, g l := l h(l)g(l). Moreover one has for f, g  C(Cm), by Fourier inversion

      f, g C(Cm) = (f              1                     1
                           g)(0) = F(F(f             g))(0) = F(F(f ) · F(g))(0) =
                                      m                          m

                        1                             1
                   =            F (f )(l)F (g)(l) = m F (f ), F (g) l .
                      m    l

Thus the isomorphism F : C(Cm)  l(Cm) is compatible (up to normalization)

with the pairing, so (i) follows.

(ii) Follows from (i). Note that both F and F are isomorphisms C(Cm)  l(Cm)
so that there is no issue on the choice of F in the formula for the pairing.

   The operator norm of elements of C(Cm) is given by the sup norm (l norm)
of the Fourier transform. The dual of the operator norm is given exactly by the l1

norm and both norms are easier to compute than for the Toeplitz operator system

and its dual.

   This duality implies that there is a one-to-one correspondence between pure
states of l(Cm) and extreme rays in the positive cone C(Cm)+, as well as the
converse. Of course, in all cases, these spaces are just given by the m'th roots of
unity. Note that viewing C(Cm) as a subsystem of C(S1)(m) as shown in (15)
        SPECTRAL TRUNCATIONS IN NCG AND OPERATOR SYSTEMS                 41

the extreme rays of C(Cm)+ are those extreme rays of C(S1)+(m) which belong to
C  (Cm ).

   It is interesting to compare the finite nature of this structure to the much richer
structure encountered for the Toeplitz operator system, where a whole S1-worth of
extreme rays has been found, not to mention the rich structure of the pure state
space. The underlying reason is that of symmetry: for C(S1)(n) the symmetry
group is S1 while for the circulant matrices this is reduced to the cyclic group
of order m. Moreover, a comparison between the frameworks of the cyclic group
and the Toeplitz operator system suggests that Theorem 4.14 is a generalization of
the (finite) Fourier transform. In the next subsection we will further explore the
relation between circulant and Toeplitz matrices.

5.2. Relation between circulant and Toeplitz matrices. Given a Toeplitz
matrix of size n, it is possible to `complete' it to a circulant matrix of size 2n - 1.
More precisely, we have the following classical result.

Proposition 5.2. Let m  2n - 1. Then any Toeplitz matrix T  C(S1)(n) can be
obtained as the compression of an m × m circulant matrix C to the upper-left n × n
corner:

                                              T = PnCPn

where Pn projects onto the linear span of the first n canonical basis vectors. In other
words, conjugation by P induces a completely positive map C(Cm)  C(S1)(n).

Proof. For any Toeplitz matrix T = (tk-l), the sought-for circulant matrix is given
as follows:

       t0      t-1 · · · t-n+2 t-n+1 tn-1 · · · t2           t1 

       t1      t0 t-1              t-n+2 t-n+1       · · · t2 

        ...    t1       t0    ...  ...          ...          ...    
                                                                    
                                                                    

                        ...   ...               ...  ...            

        tn-2                       t-1                       tn-1   
                                                                    

C  =    tn-1   tn-2     ···   t1   t0   t-1 · · ·            t-n+1    .
                                                                    

        t-n+1  tn-1  tn-2     ···  t1   t0      t-1  ···     t-n+2  
                                                                    

        ...             ... ...         ... ...              ...    
                                                                    
                                                                    

                              ...  ...          ... ...             

                                                                    
       t-2                                                   t-1 

        t-1 t-2 · · · t-n+1 tn-1 tn-2 · · · t1               t0

   Another intriguing property of the inclusion of the Toeplitz operator system
inside M2n-1(C) by the map T  T  0n-1 is the following construction of a map

                             : l(C2n-1)  C(S1)(n)  M2n-1(C),

where both C(S1)(n) and M2n-1(C) are equipped with the operator norm.
   We let S denote the (cyclic) shift matrix in M2n-1(C) defined by S(ek) = ek+1

for k = 1, . . . , 2n - 2 and S(e2n-1) = e1. We then define in terms of f  l(C2n+1)
and a Toeplitz matrix T  C(S1)(n):

                        2n-1

             (f  T ) =        fkSk (T  0n-1) S-k  M2n-1(C).

                        k=1
42  ALAIN CONNES AND WALTER D. VAN SUIJLEKOM

Since all operator spaces are finite-dimensional,  is completely bounded but bijec-
tivity of it is harder to establish and, in fact, not always true.

Proposition 5.3. If 2n - 1 is a prime number, then the map  is a completely
positive bijection on the minimal tensor product

                            l(C2n-1) min C(S1)(n) = M2n-1(C).

Proof. To prove the proposition it is enough to show that the map  is completely

positive and that it is surjective, since the dimensions of both sides are the same.

   Note that the minimal tensor product is realized as an operator system inside
B(l2(C2n-1)  Cn). In other words, if we write f = fkk  l(C2n-1) then
a general element k fkk  Tk  l(C2n-1) min C(S1)(n) is realized as the
Kronecker product diag(f1T1, . . . , f2n-1T2n-1). If this is a positive matrix then
the image under  is clearly positive.

   For surjectivity of  one first identifies the matrix algebra with the crossed
product of (C2n-1) represented as diagonal matrices by the action of C2n-1.
More precisely, any element x  M2n-1(C) is uniquely of the form

            2n-1

      x=          fkSk, fk  (C2n-1).

            k=1

Note that the sub-spaces of the crossed product of (C2n-1) by the action of

C2n-1 involving a fixed power j of S are pairwise linearly independent and span
the whole crossed product so that it suffices to show the surjectivity of  on each

such subspace. The Toeplitz operators are uniquely obtained as compressions on

the n dimensional space with projection P = 1n  0n-1  (C2n-1) of linear
combinations of powers of S. Let j = P SjP be the Toeplitz operator obtained by
compression of Sj on P . These operators fulfill, for fixed j,

    (k  j ) = Sk (j  0n-1) S-k = SkP Sj P S-k = SkSj QS-k = Sj SkQS-k

where Q = S-jP SjP is a fixed self-adjoint idempotent. It is non-zero since it is
given by the intersection of two sub-spaces of dimension n and the sum of dimensions
exceeds p = 2n - 1. Thus, fixing j and taking linear combinations of the form

      2n-1              2n-1

            k  kj = Sj        k SkQS-k,

      k=1               k=1

the next lemma applies and gives the required surjectivity of the linear map .

Lemma 5.4. Let C2n-1 be a cyclic group of prime order p = 2n - 1.
(i) Let X  C2n-1 be a non-empty subset X = C2n-1 and   C^2n-1 a character
of C2n-1. Then gX (g) = 0.
(ii) Let 0 < Q < 1 be a self-adjoint idempotent in (C2n-1). Then the linear
space generated by the conjugates SkQS-k (under the action of C2n-1 on itself ) is
 (C2n-1).

Proof. (i) We can assume that  is non-trivial. Since p is prime the subgroup

(C2n-1)  µp (roots of unity of order p) is equal to µp. Thus it is enough to show
that for any subset Y  µp, Y =  such that uY u = 0 one has Y = µp. Let
 be a primitive root of 1 of order p and Z  {0, . . . , p - 1} such that Y = Z.
Then the polynomial A(x) := Z xj fulfills A() = 0 and is hence a multiple of the
cyclotomic polynomial. But the latter is of degree p - 1 since p is prime, and thus
SPECTRAL TRUNCATIONS IN NCG AND OPERATOR SYSTEMS  43

one gets that A is equal to the cyclotomic polynomial and thus Z = {0, . . . , p - 1}.
(ii) Let X  C2n-1 be the non-empty subset X = C2n-1 corresponding to the
self-adjoint idempotent 0 < Q < 1. Let E be the linear space generated by the
conjugates SkQS-k. The invariance of E under the action of C2n-1 means that its
image E^ under Fourier transform is an ideal. Thus if it is non-trivial there exists a
point of the dual group C^2n-1 on which all elements of E^ vanish. Equivalently this
means that there exists a character  of C2n-1 such that , E = 0 or equivalently
that , Q = 0. One has

                                           , Q = (g).

                                                                             gX

Thus by (i) one gets that , Q = 0 and this shows that E = (C2n-1).

   Note that the map  is not a complete order isomorphism. This can be seen as
follows. Note that up to a scaling factor it is a unital map, so by Proposition 2.6 it
is a complete order injection if and only if it is a complete isometry. But a simple
calculation for 2 × 2 Toeplitz matrices already shows that  is not isometric.

                                             6. Outlook

   In this paper we have introduced a new approach to noncommutative geometry
where the prominent role traditionally played by C-algebras is taken over by op-
erator systems. The matrix ordering makes it possible that most of the theory still
goes through, including state spaces, cones of positive elements, distance functions,
etc.

   The examples we have considered show that spectral truncations allows one
to work with finite-dimensional operator systems, while keeping in tact the full
symmetry of the original space. For instance, the Toeplitz operator systems possess
an S1 symmetry, and as a consequence have a very rich extremal and pure state
space structure. This is in contrast with the circulant matrices, where the symmetry
is reduced to a discrete group. So, even though both spaces converge in Gromov­
Hausdorff distance to the circle, for the second one loses a lot of structure in the
finite-dimensional reduction.

   The duality between the Toeplitz operator system C(S1)(n) and the (truncated)
group algebra C(Z)(n) also uncovers the following intriguing relation between the
fermionic and bosonic content of a spectral triple. As explained at the beginning
of Section 3 the truncation on the Fourier modes of the (fermionic) vectors in the
Hilbert space gives rise to the Toeplitz operator system C(S1)(n) = PnC(S1)Pn,
but the dual system C(Z)(n) describes truncations of the Fourier modes of the
(bosonic) elements in the function algebra C(S1).

   In a forthcoming paper we shall show how, using as proposed in this paper
operator systems rather than C-algebras, the fundamental idea of noncommutative
geometry of associating a noncommutative C-algebra to a quotient space which
is intractable by standard topological methods, extends to situations where the
equivalence relation defining the quotient is no longer assumed to be transitive.
Such relations are called tolerance relations and can be traced back to Poincar´e in
his Science and Hypothesis (though the name was coined in [54]). Poincar´e argued
that in the physical continuum (in contrast with the mathematical continuum)
it can hold that for measured quantities one has A = B, B = C while A < C
due to potentially added measurement errors (see [51] for a development of the
44  ALAIN CONNES AND WALTER D. VAN SUIJLEKOM

mathematical theory). This will allow us to extend the scope of noncommutative
geometry and, in particular, to introduce another operator system that appears
naturally when one studies spaces up to some energy scale. In terms of position
space this amounts to introducing a finite resolution  and the tolerance relation
between points x, y which is given by d(x, y) < . It allows one to define an
operator system which, in the case that the relation is transitive, becomes the
usual equivalence groupoid C-algebra [44]. We shall analyze the C-envelope and
express the propagation number in terms of the diameter of the metric space. We
will also characterize the pure state space of the operator system by means of a
support condition on vector states.

                                            References

 [1] N. I. Aheizer and M. Krein. Some questions in the theory of moments. translated by W.
      Fleming and D. Prill. Translations of Mathematical Monographs, Vol. 2. American Mathe-
      matical Society, Providence, R.I., 1962.

 [2] W. Arveson. Notes on the unique extension property. Preprint (2003).
 [3] W. Arveson. The noncommutative Choquet boundary. J. Amer. Math. Soc. 21 (2008) 1065­

      1084.
 [4] W. B. Arveson. Subalgebras of C-algebras. Acta Math. 123 (1969) 141­224.
 [5] T. B¨ackstr¨om. Vandermonde factorization of Toeplitz matrices and applications in filtering

      and warping. IEEE Trans. Signal Process. 61 (2013) 6257­6263.
 [6] M. Bakonyi and H.J. Woerdeman. Matrix Completions, Moments, and Sums of Hermitian

      Squares. Princeton Series in Applied Mathematics (37), Princeton University Press, 2011.
 [7] T. Berendschot. Truncated geometry. Master's thesis, Radboud University Nijmegen, 2019.
 [8] B. Blackadar. Operator algebras, volume 122 of Encyclopaedia of Mathematical Sciences.

      Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 2006. Theory of C-algebras and von Neumann algebras, Operator
      Algebras and Non-commutative Geometry, III.
 [9] D. P. Blecher and C. Le Merdy. Operator algebras and their modules--an operator space ap-
      proach, volume 30 of London Mathematical Society Monographs. New Series. The Clarendon
      Press, Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2004. Oxford Science Publications.
[10] D. P. Blecher and M. Neal, Metric Characterizations of Isometries and of unital operator
      spaces and systems, Proc.AMS Volume 139, Number 3, (2011), 985­998.
[11] O. Bratteli and D. W. Robinson. Operator algebras and quantum statistical mechanics (Sec-
      ond Edition). Springer-Verlag, 1987.
[12] L. E. G. Brouwer. Beweis der Invarianz des n-dimensionalen Gebiets. Math. Ann. 82 (1921)
      286.
[13] L. G. Brown, P. Green, and M. A. Rieffel. Stable isomorphism and strong Morita equivalence
      of C-algebras. Pacific J. Math. 71 (1977) 349­363.
[14] C. Cabrelli and U. Molter. The Kantorovich metric for probability measures on the circle.
      J. Comput. Appl. Math. 57 (1995), no. 3, 345­361
[15] C. Carath´eodory. U¨ ber den Variabilita¨tsbereich der Fourierschen Konstanten von positiven
      harmonischen Funktionen. Rend. Circ. Mat. Palermo 32 (1911) 193­217.
[16] A. H. Chamseddine, A. Connes, and V. Mukhanov. Geometry and the quantum: Basics.
      JHEP 1412 (2014) 098.
[17] A. H. Chamseddine, A. Connes, and V. Mukhanov. Quanta of geometry: Noncommutative
      aspects. Phys. Rev. Lett. 114 (2015) 091302.
[18] M. D. Choi and E. G. Effros. Injectivity and operator spaces. J. Funct. Anal. 24 (1977)
      156­209.
[19] A. Connes. Noncommutative Geometry. Academic Press, San Diego, 1994.
[20] A. Connes. On the spectral characterization of manifolds. J. Noncommut. Geom. 7 (2013)
      1­82.
[21] A. Connes and C. Consani. Spec Z and the Gromov norm, Theory and Applications of
      Categories 35 (2020) 155­178.
[22] A. Connes and C. Consani. Segal's Gamma rings and universal arithmetic. arXiv:2004.08879
SPECTRAL TRUNCATIONS IN NCG AND OPERATOR SYSTEMS  45

[23] F. D'Andrea, F. Lizzi, and P. Martinetti. Spectral geometry with a cut-off: topological and
      metric aspects. J. Geom. Phys. 82 (2014) 18­45.

[24] F. D'Andrea and P. Martinetti. A view on optimal transport from noncommutative geome-
      try. SIGMA Symmetry Integrability Geom. Methods Appl. 6 (2010) Paper 057, 24.

[25] K. R. Davidson and M. Kennedy. The Choquet boundary of an operator system. Duke Math.
      J. 164 (2015) 2989­3004.

[26] M. A. Dritschel and S. A. McCullough. Boundary representations for families of represen-
      tations of operator algebras and spaces. J. Operator Theory 53 (2005) 159­167.

[27] E. G. Effros and Z.-J. Ruan. Operator spaces, volume 23 of London Mathematical Society
      Monographs. New Series. The Clarendon Press, Oxford University Press, New York, 2000.

[28] G. K. Eleftherakis and E. T. A. Kakariadis. Strong Morita equivalence of operator spaces.
      J. Math. Anal. Appl. 446 (2017) 1632­1653.

[29] D. Farenick and V. I. Paulsen. Operator system quotients of matrix algebras and their tensor
      products. Math. Scand. 111 (2012) 210­243.

[30] L. Fej´er. U¨ ber trigonometrische Polynome. J. Reine Angew. Math. 146 (1916) 53­82.
[31] L. Glaser and A. Stern. Reconstructing manifolds from truncated spectral triples.

      arXiv:1912.09227.
[32] L. Glaser and A. Stern. Understanding truncated non-commutative geometries through com-

      puter simulations. arXiv:1909.08054.
[33] U. Grenander and G. Szeg¨o. Toeplitz forms and their applications. California Monographs

      in Mathematical Sciences. University of California Press, Berkeley-Los Angeles, 1958.
[34] M. Gromov. Metric structures for Riemannian and non-Riemannian spaces. Modern

      Birkh¨auser Classics. Birkha¨user Boston, Inc., Boston, MA, english edition, 2007. Based on
      the 1981 French original, With appendices by M. Katz, P. Pansu and S. Semmes, Translated
      from the French by Sean Michael Bates.
[35] M. Hamana. Injective envelopes of operator systems. Publ. Res. Inst. Math. Sci. 15 (1979)
      773­785.
[36] A. Kavruk, V. I. Paulsen, I. G. Todorov, and M. Tomforde. Tensor products of operator
      systems. J. Funct. Anal. 261 (2011) 267­299.
[37] D. Kerr. Matricial quantum Gromov-Hausdorff distance. J. Funct. Anal. 205 (2003) 132­167.
[38] F. Latr´emoli`ere. The quantum Gromov-Hausdorff propinquity. Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 368
      (2016) 365­411.
[39] J.-Z. Li and C.-K. Ng. Tensor products for non-unital operator systems. J.Math. Anal. Appl.
      396 (2012) 601­605.
[40] V. Paulsen. Completely bounded maps and operator algebras, volume 78 of Cambridge Stud-
      ies in Advanced Mathematics. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2002.
[41] R. R. Phelps. Lectures on Choquet's theorem, volume 1757 of Lecture Notes in Mathematics.
      Springer-Verlag, Berlin, second edition, 2001.
[42] G. Pisier. Introduction to operator space theory, volume 294 of London Mathematical Society
      Lecture Note Series. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2003.
[43] S. S. Reddi. Eigenvector properties of Toeplitz matrices and their application to spectral
      analysis of time series. Signal Process. 7 (1984) 45­56.
[44] J. Renault. A groupoid approach to C-algebras, volume 793 of Lecture Notes in Mathemat-
      ics. Springer, Berlin, 1980.
[45] M. A. Rieffel. Metrics on state spaces. Doc. Math. 4 (1999) 559­600.
[46] M. A. Rieffel. Gromov-Hausdorff distance for quantum metric spaces. Mem. Amer. Math.
      Soc. 168 (2004) 1­65.
[47] F. Riesz. U¨ ber ein Problem des Herrn Carath´eodory. J. Reine Angew. Math. 146 (1916)
      83­87.
[48] J. Roe. Lectures on coarse geometry, volume 31 of University Lecture Series. American
      Mathematical Society, Providence, RI, 2003.
[49] Z.-J. Ruan. Subspaces of C-algebras. J. Funct. Anal. 76 (1988) 217­230.
[50] W. Rudin. Real and complex analysis. McGraw-Hill, Third Edition, 1986.
[51] A. B. Sossinsky. Tolerance space theory and some applications. Acta Appl. Math. 5 (1986)
      137­167.
[52] W. Werner. Subspaces of L(H) that are -invariant. J. Funct. Anal. 193 (2002) 207­223.
[53] Z. Yang and L. Xie. Frequency-selective vandermonde decomposition of toeplitz matrices
      with applications. Signal Processing 142 (2018) 157­167.
46  ALAIN CONNES AND WALTER D. VAN SUIJLEKOM

 [54] E. C. Zeeman. The topology of the brain and visual perception. In Topology of 3-manifolds
        and related topics (Proc. The Univ. of Georgia Institute, 1961), pages 240­256. Prentice-
        Hall, Englewood Cliffs, N.J., 1962.

    College de France, 3 rue Ulm, F75005, Paris, France, I.H.E.S. F-91440 Bures-sur-
Yvette, France, Department of Mathematics, Ohio State University, Columbus OH
43210 USA,

    E-mail address: alain@connes.org

    Institute for Mathematics, Astrophysics and Particle Physics, Radboud University
Nijmegen, Heyendaalseweg 135, 6525 AJ Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

    E-mail address: waltervs@math.ru.nl
